[Amit Varma]: The days are long, but the years are short. When a year ends, as 2022 is ending soon,
[Amit Varma]: it's a good time to sit back and take stock. But for this year-ending episode, I didn't
[Amit Varma]: want big serious subjects, ponderous self-reflection, laments about the state of the world. Instead,
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to sit and take stock of all the things that should give us hope. I wanted
[Amit Varma]: life lessons that could inspire us to move forward. I often speak of hope and despair
[Amit Varma]: on this show. Well, in this episode, I wanted you and me to feel hopeful at the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: And boy, am I happy with the two friends I called on and the conversation we had.
[Amit Varma]: This was one of my most enjoyable conversations. And when I heard it back,
[Amit Varma]: I was blown away by the amount of wisdom that these two guests brought to the table,
[Amit Varma]: which I hadn't even noticed while recording because we were so busy having a blast.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I know this was a long episode, but my last episode to go over 7 hours,
[Amit Varma]: episode 303 with Nikhil Taneja, the loneliness of the Indian man,
[Amit Varma]: touched so many people so deeply that I'm still getting emails about it. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I only go long when the conversation is so great that we lose track of time.
[Amit Varma]: So do listen to this episode as well, in parts if you have to. When you reach the end,
[Amit Varma]: I promise you'll ask, hey, why did it end so soon? But hey, 2022 is also ending so soon.
[Amit Varma]: But let's enjoy the years ahead of us and the many conversations ahead of us.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics,
[Unknown]: politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guests today for the special year-end episode are my
[Amit Varma]: good friends Vikram Sathe and Roshan Abbas. Now, if I try to give Roshan the introduction he
[Amit Varma]: deserves, that only will take 7 hours. He's a radio star, a TV star, an events mogul, a filmmaker,
[Amit Varma]: an entrepreneur and today, a mentor and an inspiration to young creators everywhere
[Amit Varma]: and older ones like me. But most of all, at least for me, he's a good human being
[Amit Varma]: who makes me also want to be a better person. He's been on the show before, and I urge you
[Amit Varma]: to check out that earlier episode as well, in which he talks about his life, his learnings
[Amit Varma]: and the creator economy. In this episode, we spoke more about his life and learnings,
[Amit Varma]: and he spoke about what he learnt and unlearned while playing the role of Lalit Verma in the
[Amit Varma]: musical version of Monsoon Wedding, which is going to Broadway soon. How Meera Nair taught him to have
[Amit Varma]: the heart of a poet and the skin of an elephant. And how, as Roshan keeps telling me, one must
[Amit Varma]: either be interested or be interesting. And to me, Roshan is both of those, which is why he makes for
[Amit Varma]: such a delightful guest. My other guest today is my old buddy Vikram Sathe, also known variously
[Amit Varma]: as Baljeet and Parpeetaram, who was my contemporary in Ferguson College, Pune in the early 1990s,
[Amit Varma]: and later my colleague at MTV in the mid to late 90s. He worked in marketing then,
[Amit Varma]: which was kind of at odds with his past as a budding musician, singer and cricketer. Now,
[Amit Varma]: one of his side skills then was comedy, and one subset of his comedy skills was mimicry. He soon
[Amit Varma]: got known for that, entertained people with his stand-up act on cricket, and what was timepass
[Amit Varma]: at parties became a profession. A decade before India's stand-up explosion, Vikram was doing sold
[Amit Varma]: out shows and corporate events and did literally thousands of performances. He also got into cricket
[Amit Varma]: broadcasting and became good friends with top cricketers, just as he already was with top
[Amit Varma]: artists. He's one person I know who was close to both the Tendulkars, Vijay Tendulkar and Sachin
[Amit Varma]: Tendulkar, and one of his great skills was in imbibing life lessons from everyone he came
[Amit Varma]: across. He did this from both Tendulkars, he wrote a best-selling book about his journey,
[Amit Varma]: and then made a wildly successful YouTube show, What the Duck with Vikram Sathe,
[Amit Varma]: in which he spoke to top cricketers and revealed the way they think for all of us.
[Amit Varma]: Besides his comedy and his YouTubing, he also became a top motivational speaker,
[Amit Varma]: and now spends time investing his hard-earned money, paying it back as it were.
[Amit Varma]: I've always loved three qualities of Vikram which I try to work on for myself. One,
[Amit Varma]: his constant curiosity about the world. Two, his humility, despite his many achievements,
[Amit Varma]: which always keeps him open to learning into new experiences. And three, his good humour,
[Amit Varma]: the positive energy that keeps him moving forward. And hey, coming to think of it,
[Amit Varma]: Roshan shares these qualities as well. We explored Vikram's journey in this episode,
[Amit Varma]: in which he shared his learnings from Bollywood, from the corporate world, from sport,
[Amit Varma]: and as Roshan did as well, from life. This is one of the most enjoyable conversations I've
[Amit Varma]: ever had on the show, not least because of the feast of singing towards the end.
[Amit Varma]: Just wonderful. But before we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent,
[Amit Varma]: just a willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Roshan and Vikram, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous to be here with you again.
[Guest 2]: Thank you Amit for having me. 30 years I've known you, finally you've given me some respect.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, that's a good way to start. So let me start by sort of bringing up an interesting
[Amit Varma]: observation. Yesterday I saw this tweet from Tim Urban basically to the effect of how when you are
[Amit Varma]: young, you have no money, but lots of time. And as you get older, when you get to the age that we are,
[Amit Varma]: you have the money problem is hopefully solved, you have more money, but you have less time,
[Amit Varma]: time is a scarce resource. And you know, Paul Graham replied to this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: from an investment point of view saying that when you're building something for the young,
[Amit Varma]: remember that they have no money, but they have time and vice versa for older people.
[Amit Varma]: And I was kind of just wondering, you know, given that we are sort of middle aged,
[Amit Varma]: so I shouldn't, you know, say Roshan is already looking upset because he's young.
[Amit Varma]: Given that we are, you know, late 40s, early 50s, you know, how would you sort of think about,
[Amit Varma]: think about this? Like, how has this changed what you do now, as opposed to you know,
[Amit Varma]: how you lived your lives when you were young?
[Guest 1]: So, see, personally, I completely agree with the fact of saying that time becomes a scarce resource
[Guest 1]: over a period of time, I mean, as you age, but somehow, if you really need to keep optimize time
[Guest 1]: and expand it, the first thing that I started doing very early was I make myself redundant in
[Guest 1]: every job that I do. I immediately very quickly find a replacement, teach them what I know and
[Guest 1]: very quickly find a replacement, teach them what I know and move on. Because that's when I again find
[Guest 1]: that free time available. During the pandemic, I hired two people, I call them my left brain,
[Guest 1]: my right brain. And both of these guys actually do 150% of what I do, because 50% of what they do
[Guest 1]: is stuff I could never do. I'm not good with finance, I'm not very, very good with follow
[Guest 1]: up on a couple of things. You know, if you really need to analyze things, I react far more, you know,
[Guest 1]: from a creative perspective, I love the idea, but I may not think so much about the execution.
[Guest 1]: So all of these, you know, so they were able to take that on, they are one is 25, one is 24.
[Guest 1]: You know, so I've actually, that's how I'm trying to optimize it to a certain degree. But I do feel
[Guest 1]: that these two concepts, I mean, if you have to constantly look at life from money and, you know,
[Guest 1]: time perspective, I somehow really look at it a little differently. I'm always just trying to see
[Guest 1]: that, can you make your life richer in any way, whether it is meeting up with friends,
[Guest 1]: catching up on conversation, whether it's reading, whether it's writing, whether it's,
[Guest 1]: you know, going out and doing a play or doing whatever else. But I just think, you know,
[Guest 1]: I think I'm just a huge enthusiast of jumping into doing things in life.
[Guest 1]: Time expands or contracts to fill the space, I think, you know, as work does at the same time.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so this doesn't apply to me, because I don't see any change in me over the last
[Guest 2]: 48 years that I'm alive. Because for me, as I mentioned to you in the beginning,
[Guest 2]: Amit that my desire was not there. So nothing changed drastically. If I was at eight years,
[Guest 2]: a certain mindset, which is low attention span, doing whatever's going on on a daily basis. This
[Guest 2]: is exactly how I live today. There was this eight years in corporate life, that I was a little bit
[Guest 2]: different because it was a nine to nine routine. After that, I got back to my childhood. So the
[Guest 2]: transition of going into a corporate job was the only aberration for eight years. After that,
[Guest 2]: I'm back because I'm a freelancer. And for me, I've realized that do little, get more output.
[Guest 2]: If you can crack that I have enough and more time for me. So honestly, I can't answer this
[Guest 2]: question because I have no thoughts I have, I've remained exactly the same.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you mentioned earlier at breakfast that you don't remember anything. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: every day is a new day. But even then, I mean, the question of no desire, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I kind of get it in the sense that many people have these long arching ambitions,
[Amit Varma]: and fine, you don't have that. But nevertheless, you have some desires, which is why you kind of
[Amit Varma]: have the kind of career that you've had, even if you didn't actively plan it out or chase it that
[Amit Varma]: way. So was it just like a series of what was your sort of philosophy and looking back philosophy,
[Amit Varma]: looking back, but not thinking about it or framing it that way? Was it really a thing of just do
[Amit Varma]: whatever makes you happy in the moment or jo hoga so hoga? Absolutely. And that came from a fact
[Guest 2]: that I was exposed to a lot of things. I played cricket for Maharashtra, I played, you know,
[Guest 2]: my mother's a classical musician. So all the cultural aspects were there. So I was getting
[Guest 2]: this base level happiness any which way. So I didn't have to do ki aage jaake merko yeh concert
[Guest 2]: dekhna hai. Sab mere paas tha so I didn't feel any deep desire to do anything. But at that moment,
[Guest 2]: I felt ki yaar yeh karke dekhte hain. So there's a difference. I didn't have any specific desire,
[Guest 2]: but I was curious. Yeh majdaar hai, yeh karke dekhte hain, yeh bhi karte hain. So
[Guest 2]: in that moment, I was getting my happiness. So why do I have to change the world?
[Amit Varma]: That was the core philosophy. So you know, Roshan's been on my show before,
[Amit Varma]: and we've explored his childhood and adulthood and so on. I won't say middle age.
[Guest 1]: Though I still believe that we were cheated by that recordist of all our time. Because
[Guest 1]: just as you're getting into the flow of things, he says, I need to sanitize the studio,
[Guest 1]: I've got a recording at 10. Aur 9 baj gaya tha. I was just like, abhi toh baat shuru hoi thi.
[Amit Varma]: So what basically happened was that Roshan and I did one of those few early recordings before I set
[Amit Varma]: up my home studio. So I had booked out a studio and I'd taken my four, five hours or whatever
[Amit Varma]: there. And it was at night. So I assumed ki agar thora extent kar liya, toh theek hai paise waise
[Amit Varma]: de denge, but time mil jayega. Paisa and time again. But they said, no, no, there's a recording
[Amit Varma]: at 10pm. And I'm still suspicious ki bhai kya tha, kaun aa raha tha 10 pajay. But yeah, so we only
[Guest 1]: had a four hour conversation, which was very sad. But we should... Again, because with Amit,
[Guest 1]: those conversations just keep, they can go on. I think if somebody offered to sleep the night here,
[Guest 1]: woh do din tak chalta rahega. Woh banega, ek 48 hours banne wala hai. Toh yeh hum koshish
[Guest 2]: karenge abhi. Aur ek interesting tha jab Amit ka email aaya, toh mujhe ek feeling aisa aaya hai ki
[Guest 2]: the way he had, you know, communicated to us, I got a feeling that abhi intellectuals bahut ho
[Unknown]: gayi. Let me lower the benchmark. Let me lower the benchmark of the show, so that next year,
[Amit Varma]: no, but you know, that's, that's partly what I was aiming for in the sense that not, not that
[Unknown]: intellectuals bahut ho gayi, they'll all be listening to this and thinking what bahut ho gayi,
[Amit Varma]: mere saath 5 ghante baat kiya. But simply because I think a lot of what happens is a lot of our
[Amit Varma]: conversations get damn serious and you're lamenting the state of the country and all of that, which
[Amit Varma]: deserves to be lamented. But at the same time, I think that sometimes you also need to celebrate
[Amit Varma]: the little things that are there and not so much as celebrate in terms of har cheez mein aap
[Amit Varma]: positive dhundo. But just that, you know, I think all of us have in different ways found, you know,
[Amit Varma]: figured out ways to make sense of the world, find happiness for ourselves. And it's interesting to
[Amit Varma]: sort of for me to look back on that, share the good things and talk about that. And so Vikram,
[Unknown]: had you had a very tragic life, I may not have called you here, ki kaun sunna chhata hai yaar,
[Unknown]: ki I was impoverished at the age of eight, main matlab nal chowk pe bheek maangta tha.
[Guest 2]: Jaise maine bola tha ki impoverished hoon, probably tha, magar main bhool gaya. So as I've told you that my ability to forget what's
[Guest 2]: happened in the past, as I told Roshan and you in the morning, that I one day made a list of people
[Guest 2]: ki inse mujhe badla lena hai, badla ki aag mere. And I forgot why they had done bad things to me.
[Guest 2]: So then I decided to cancel the badla. And then he forgot the list also.
[Guest 2]: And I think that is the secret to happiness, low attention span and less memory.
[Amit Varma]: In the manifestations, which you mentioned it, but I'm sure not by themselves, like Roshan will
[Amit Varma]: know on my writing group, which we are part of the WhatsApp group, I mentioned an author yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: And I said that, okay, you know, he's a good guy. I like his work. But two years back, he exploded
[Amit Varma]: at me on social media for something I did, but I couldn't remember why. So I was like, theek hai jaane do, abhi yaad nahi hai, kuch hua hoga.
[Guest 2]: Exactly, toh khush hai na tu.
[Amit Varma]: Main toh khush hoon. So to kind of get back to you. So, you know, tell me about your childhood, where did you grow up? Tell me about your mom?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so as I said that I don't remember much, but whatever I remember, I'll tell you that
[Guest 2]: I was a service officer's kid. My dad was in the Air Force. And I remember most of the postings,
[Guest 2]: we were in Bareilly and Jamnagar. And then the best posting we ever had was the National Defense
[Guest 2]: Academy. And that's where I realized that I do not want to join the armed forces because it was a
[Guest 2]: beautiful resort, but you don't want to be part of it from the active level. And service officers
[Guest 2]: children have always two options, right? Either you get inspired ki hamare pardada bhi army mein hua karte the types
[Guest 2]: or second is bhai apne bas ki baat nahi hai. And that happened to me in the National Defense Academy.
[Guest 2]: My dad was, you know, we were on a scooter and the NDA cadets while they are, you know,
[Guest 2]: going on a cycle next to you, if they see a senior officer or
[Guest 2]: wife, you're supposed to stretch your arms like this on the cycle, which means that respect diya
[Guest 2]: aapko. Toh we were there and my dad's coursemate, he was also driving and then suddenly he realized
[Guest 2]: that this yeh cadet ne aise haath nahi kiya tha, stretch nahi kiya tha. And he stopped the cadet
[Guest 2]: and asked him, what's your name? So I don't remember the cadet's name. So it's say, for example,
[Guest 2]: Roshan Abbas. So R-O-S-H aise front roll sabke saamne karnega. And that when I saw, I realized
[Guest 2]: bhai, my dad would start doing this at home. So I'm not going to join the National Defense Academy,
[Guest 2]: but the good news was because you are an Air Force officer's son, you play golf at a young age,
[Guest 2]: you get exposed to, there's so many cricket grounds there, football grounds. So my love
[Guest 2]: for sports started at the National Defense Academy. The good news was that some 25 years later,
[Guest 2]: I performed for the 117th course there. And I told my father, without doing all this effort,
[Guest 2]: see, I'm addressing the entire academy in front of the admiral of the Indian Navy.
[Guest 2]: So that's how my childhood was going from one Air Force station to the other. And then one fine day,
[Guest 2]: my parents said ki yaar isko thoda stabilize karke. So we came to Pune. Now, Pune at that
[Guest 2]: point of time was, means, you know, Gokhale, Ranade, Agarkar, that was the background and
[Guest 2]: Gokhale Institute. I know Amit had an interface with that institute. So it was an amazing
[Guest 2]: cosmopolitan world in the armed forces to hardcore Puneri. And I loved it because in the armed
[Guest 2]: forces, you're not exposed to art in that form, right? Everybody, NDA cadets also do a great job
[Guest 2]: when it comes to theater, music and all of that. But when I came to Pune, I realized that there was
[Guest 2]: this new world, which I loved, which is, you know, getting exposed to going for Sawai Gandharva at
[Guest 2]: six in the morning. And my mother shifted with me to make sure my education was good. So I
[Guest 2]: was in Karnataka High School. I got introduced to Pula Deshpande, who I believe is the greatest
[Guest 2]: living legend across the world because nobody is an actor, writer, director, harmonium player,
[Guest 2]: music composer, plus Ran Doordarshan for such a long time and an orator. It's a disrespect to
[Guest 2]: call him a comedian. So from that perspective, Indian classical music and my introduction to
[Guest 2]: cricket, I started playing at PYC. And that's where I realized that I had a lot of cricket in
[Guest 2]: me mentally, but not physically, because that was the generation of Sachin Tendulkar, unfortunately
[Guest 2]: for us. And that's the reason I wrote this book, How Sachin Destroyed My Life, which we'll talk
[Guest 2]: about it later. And I started playing and I realized that I had a good hand-eye coordination.
[Guest 2]: I was doing well. The music was going well. I started playing the tabla. So then once I settled
[Guest 2]: in Pune, I got exposed to this world and I was in Narayan Ped, hardcore Peshwa territory,
[Guest 2]: where music and arts was flowing. Experimental theater was in a big way there. And then
[Guest 2]: post that, I joined Ferguson College where I met Amit Verma.
[Guest 1]: That's what I was going to say. I said, Ferguson must have been a common thing for you guys.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the weird thing is, I don't think we knew each other.
[Amit Varma]: It's only later when we were both working in MTV in the late 90s, 97, 98,
[Amit Varma]: that we realized that, hey, we are both from Ferguson and we had common friends and all of
[Amit Varma]: that, whom I'm sure he's forgotten. He was like, okay. So we actually became friends then. So it's
[Amit Varma]: kind of weird. You know, so I can technically call him a college friend, but we didn't know
[Guest 1]: each other in college. My only theory on that would be that you were, as you keep saying,
[Guest 1]: you're an introvert. So you did what to meet new people. And Sathe was too lazy to meet anyone.
[Guest 2]: No, but you know, I remember him because there was this group of guys who used to play chess
[Guest 2]: just near the Ferguson canteen. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So behind the gym building. Yeah,
[Guest 2]: behind the gym building. And I used to see these guys and say, every day they play chess. And he
[Guest 2]: was a good chess player. And I was a college captain and played for Maharashtra and all of that.
[Guest 2]: So I was told that these guys are great. So say hello to them. If you get a chance, do it.
[Guest 2]: So that's why I remember Amit very well. And I think, did you ever go to the National Film
[Guest 2]: Archives, NFAI at some point? I would have gone there to see films. My dad was director of the
[Guest 2]: FTII. But I would go for the film festivals at NFAI. I think I met you there once. Possible.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. See, I also forget everything. It's a tiny secret. People ask me,
[Amit Varma]: how is your retention? And I have to tell them that boss, there is a lot of research.
[Amit Varma]: I do all my research one day before the episodes. I don't remember anything after that.
[Guest 1]: So like, I have a strange feeling that slowly this episode is going to become
[Amit Varma]: like Karan Arjun. And you mentioned golf. And I remember like one of my past guests,
[Amit Varma]: Subrat Mohanty, he was in town, I was hanging out with him. So he told me,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the mantra which bankers go by, which is a 963 formula. Have you heard it?
[Amit Varma]: No. So the 963 formula is, let me see, I don't want to get it wrong. Yeah. Lend at 9%,
[Amit Varma]: borrow at 6%, golf at 3 o'clock. Since you mentioned golf, and I just realized that Roshan
[Amit Varma]: a little while earlier spoke about how if you get interested in something, time expands to fill the
[Amit Varma]: work available. And that's actually where it originates from is Parkinson's law,
[Amit Varma]: is that work expands to fill the time available, which is kind of how I've lived my life. Like,
[Amit Varma]: even if I have one thing to do in a day, it will take the whole damn day. So it's, you know, us,
[Amit Varma]: lazy buggers. So tell me a bit more about, you know, Vikram, what you wanted to,
[Amit Varma]: like, when you were going through life like that, you're in a very cultural environment. So you're
[Amit Varma]: both playing tabla. And I presume singing because you do sing quite well. And you will sing for us
[Amit Varma]: later on the show. And you're also into cricket, and you're kind of picking that up. So at this
[Amit Varma]: point, you know, what did you think of yourself doing? What was your sort of conception of
[Guest 2]: yourself? So that is the problem, right? I had no conception of anything up until today. So
[Guest 2]: the thing was that my mom was saying that, you know, tabla, keep, you know, and today in my
[Guest 2]: motivational talks, I talk about the fact that you have to be consistent and blah, blah, blah,
[Guest 2]: this exactly. So whatever I speak today is not something I did. And that is the reason I have a
[Guest 2]: gravity of the situation. And I remember having this conversation with Sanjay Manjrekar. And he
[Guest 2]: said that one of the reasons I can probably analyze the game better is because I was not
[Guest 2]: good enough. And I think he did not say it in these words, but this is what I interpreted,
[Guest 2]: because this was a conversation I had with him about Sachin Tendulkar. And he said that many a
[Guest 2]: time Sachin Tendulkar did not realize that he was too good to know that there are other people who
[Guest 2]: may not be as good enough. And therefore you have to plan for them as well. And I realized that my
[Guest 2]: understanding of the environment was better from probably a writer's perspective is because I could
[Guest 2]: not play the on drive as good as the other guy. Sometimes as artists, as sports people, we do
[Guest 2]: things naturally. And this is a conversation again with Sachin Tendulkar. And I asked him that,
[Guest 2]: how did you motivate yourself? And he looked at me like, are you even crazy? Are you crazy?
[Guest 2]: What is motivation? So I said that, you know, you have to push yourself to do. He said, never.
[Unknown]: If you like something, why would you like to, why would you want to push? Now he doesn't realize
[Guest 2]: that nine out of 10 people on a bad day require some kind of an external stimulus to go and do
[Guest 2]: what they, even if they like that activity. So for me, I realized that, you know, I was liking this,
[Guest 2]: but there was not that intrinsic desire of putting eight hours. That is the laziness factor that
[Guest 2]: Roshan talked about. But that process of going to Sawai Gandharvan, listening to Pandit Bhimsen Joshi
[Guest 2]: at 6am, that gave me joy. And I thought, I have to stay in this. I have to stay in this joy.
[Guest 2]: This doesn't mean that I have to become Pandit Bhimsen Joshi. Now that is something I realized
[Guest 2]: that this excellence of excellence is fine, but I don't have to do it. But whoever has excellence,
[Guest 2]: if he goes there and stays in the pond, and that is the only reason after Ferguson College, when
[Guest 2]: we had no idea about, you know, post-grad, what to do, I was playing cricket. I realized that,
[Guest 2]: you know, my coach had told me that you've got to get at least 300 in that season to even
[Guest 2]: come to a point where you will compete with the Mumbai guys, because the Mumbai guys were making
[Guest 2]: 2-2,000 runs a season. Even Maharashtra had a fabulous team at that point of time in Ranji
[Guest 2]: Trophy. So then I realized that, boss, this is not good enough, so I will have to prepare for MBA,
[Guest 2]: because MBA was graduation by that time. You will get a job worth 8-10,000.
[Guest 2]: And thankfully, I had a good set of friends, and I always believe that, boss, 5 business relationships
[Guest 2]: and 5 friends is what you need to survive in life, because you don't have a bandwidth on this.
[Guest 2]: I don't have it. After that, you have acquaintances, whom you develop for business, that yes,
[Guest 2]: I will get business from this. But 5 friends and 5 business, and I believe that also has Pareto's
[Guest 2]: principle. If you look back at Roshan's career, probably there are 5 clients that made his last
[Guest 2]: company, Encompass. There were a lot of small companies which kind of propelled the 50 lakh,
[Guest 2]: whatever, small small business, but the big guys like what? The Asian Pay. The Asian Pay. Amit
[Guest 2]: Singles. Amit Singles of the world, exactly. And that applies to life as well, that those 5
[Guest 2]: relationships, if you develop all your life in business and in this thing, and this is something
[Guest 2]: that I kept with. And I said that these are my 4-5 friends, this is what we have to do, we have to
[Guest 2]: stay in the zone, that boss, I like cricket. And then, that is where I think I interacted with
[Guest 2]: Harsha Bhokle for the first time. And I said that yeah, this is an interesting space. Again, not
[Guest 2]: because I want to become a commentator and all, but this is a good space. So I was always looking
[Guest 2]: at spaces, that I want to swim in this pond, I want to swim in this pond, I want to become one or not,
[Guest 2]: I didn't know, because as I said, I was living those moments at that time. And then my friends
[Guest 2]: gathered together and said that, you know, see again those 5 friends came to me and said,
[Guest 2]: let's study from you, you crack the MBA entrance exam later. You will not believe, there was the
[Guest 2]: MBA entrance exam and I was not motivated to go for the exam, because I didn't know what I will
[Guest 2]: do with finance and marketing and sales. There were guys who came to my house, picked me up,
[Guest 2]: took me to the place where the, you know, they had taken my study, you know, I had taken all the
[Guest 2]: preparation for 15 days. And one of these guys, Sunil Fatak, who is now in the Bay Area, he knew
[Guest 2]: the system inside out, which questions will come. So he told me that also and I got my MBA entrance
[Guest 2]: and it was a premier college. So then I had to do my MBA. There was no option. But by that time,
[Guest 2]: I realized that media is probably a space I need to go to. And thankfully, all these friends,
[Guest 2]: my cricket friends gathered and said, okay, you know, we will find a way out somewhere
[Guest 2]: to get a career. And guess what, I had done BSc in Geology. You did a BSc in Geology? Yeah,
[Guest 2]: before that, because what happened was after 12th, everybody was engineering, engineering,
[Guest 2]: so I applied for polymer engineering. And again, my mamaji, this is a funny story, my mama came to
[Guest 2]: me and said that, you know, I don't think it's a good idea, because I have repented. I don't want
[Guest 2]: you to repent. So, and I love my mamaji because he was the one who said that, boss, don't do anything.
[Guest 2]: Everybody in the family, intellectually oriented, you should do this, you should do that,
[Guest 2]: up the benchmark. I didn't have that concept. So the story is that in BSc, I got 5 out of 100
[Guest 2]: in Chemistry. So there was a parent-teacher meeting and my mamaji went to meet the chemistry
[Guest 2]: professor. And I was like, I was really scared, what will he come and stuff like that. I was
[Guest 2]: outside waiting, what will happen, what will happen, what will happen. And I lied to them
[Guest 2]: saying that my parents are out of town. And I told mama that please go on behalf of the parents. So
[Guest 2]: he had also said, okay, I will handle this. And he came out of that parent-teacher meeting,
[Guest 2]: and he hugged me. So I said, why is he hugging me 5 out of 100, it's embarrassing. He said,
[Guest 2]: the one before you had 3 out of 100. I'm proud of you. So that is the relationship I had with my
[Guest 1]: mama. You know, I think in every family, there is a person like this. Yeah. You know,
[Guest 1]: one set of overachievers, one who is living life. No, no, because he must have suffered.
[Guest 1]: That's what I'm saying. He sees that another one is dying. Yeah, that's what I was thinking. In
[Guest 2]: every family, there is one of these. Relax, chill, life will be fine. Exactly. So he, I mean,
[Guest 2]: to complete the story, he told me not to do engineering. But then there was a balance,
[Guest 2]: you had to satisfy people at home. So it can't be arts, it can't be commerce, it has to be science.
[Guest 2]: So there was BSc, which is the most disastrous course in the history of mankind. Because you
[Guest 2]: neither here nor there. You don't have the capacity for R&D. So basically, you have to do BSc. Then
[Guest 2]: in BSc, physics, chemistry, the problem was nothing mattered. So can't study matter.
[Guest 2]: So then geology is now, when I look back, geology was a very interesting subject. But at that time,
[Guest 2]: what to see inside the rock, inside the mineral, but finally I did that. And I remember my
[Guest 2]: grandmother introducing me, typical Marathi family people coming home and said,
[Guest 2]: what has your grandson? Ordinary BSc.
[Guest 2]: How can you introduce me? Ordinary. Ordinary BSc. For her, it meant that his career is over,
[Guest 2]: he has done ordinary BSc. And there was this look on her face that it's over. So in Pune,
[Guest 2]: you could not have done BSc, it was a complete failure. But thankfully, in that process, I
[Guest 2]: realized that even with MBA, I should not be doing the standard stuff. And that's why when I came to
[Guest 2]: campus, I was one of the toppers and I did not get the companies that I wanted. Coke and Hindustan
[Guest 2]: Lever at that point of time, my CV was shortlisted. And I decided I will go on my own.
[Guest 2]: And guess what? I went to Mumbai in 1997. And I started a wrestling company.
[Amit Varma]: News to both of us.
[Guest 2]: When I got my MBA, Jerry Maguire was there and Mark McCormack.
[Guest 2]: By that time, I had clarity that if there is an interface between management and sports,
[Guest 2]: then what will happen? So obviously, watching the movie, I thought that this is a new problem,
[Guest 2]: right? Everybody is watching English Premier League. And now every kid in urban India believes
[Guest 2]: that he is going to take the football coach's job at Manchester United or Arsenal. And so I get a
[Guest 2]: call every week from some friend's son who's saying, uncle, I want to be in football. So
[Guest 2]: then suddenly I'll hear, why? You know, I want to do something because we lost. I said, who lost?
[Guest 2]: Puddar College? No, he said, Arsenal. So look at the construct of patriotism now.
[Guest 2]: Where does patriotism come from? You know, you play for your college. I played for PYC,
[Guest 2]: I played for Ferguson, I was patriotic. Now this fellow in Ghatkopar is patriotic about Chelsea.
[Guest 2]: And he wants to be the manager there. But that happened to me. That happened to me and I wanted
[Guest 2]: to head IMG, Mark McCormack, because he, you know, ran all the businesses, business of sport.
[Guest 2]: And that's what drove me to Mumbai. And that point of time Premchand Degra had become Mr. Universe.
[Guest 2]: You know, not wrestling as such, but it was bodybuilding, which went to wrestling and
[Guest 2]: Arnold Schwarzenegger's book I had read at that point of time, along with Dorian Yates,
[Guest 2]: was the bodybuilder's supreme. And one of my friends came to me that, I want to bring Mr. Universe to Mumbai.
[Guest 2]: I said, super idea. So then we contacted Mr. Universe, the franchisee, and they said that,
[Guest 2]: you know, we look at you. So I met at that time, instead of doing your summer training or whatever,
[Guest 2]: I met the Chief Minister of Maharashtra. And I told him that was Narayan Rane.
[Guest 2]: I said, I want to bring Mr. Universe. He said, what do you want to bring?
[Guest 2]: Bring him. As if I was getting some like, you know, some guy's invitation to come in a plane.
[Guest 2]: But that kind of, you know, but that six months was very important because I realized at that time
[Guest 2]: that the sports business is not to do with actually organizing sports. It was about television.
[Guest 2]: And for me, it was important that, you know, to join television to understand the sporting business.
[Guest 2]: And that's where, you know, we, the MTB offer happened. And I used to do summer training at,
[Guest 2]: you know, a company called Plus Channel during my stint and which was owned by Mahesh Bhatt.
[Guest 2]: And there I met… Mukesh Khanna? No, no. What was it? Amit… Amit Khanna. Amit Khanna, Mahesh Bhatt.
[Guest 2]: Amit Khanna, Mahesh Bhatt. And there was this movie they had done called Papa Kehte Hain, whose soundtrack was excellent, actually.
[Guest 2]: I was there at this recording. Oh, wow. Amazing. And then I said, man, this is an interesting area.
[Guest 2]: Obviously, Bollywood regular exposure was there. But I said that this is an interesting area that
[Guest 2]: I should probably look at in the future. And there was this American, Japanese boss who you know very
[Amit Varma]: well, Niren Hiromi. He's a character. MTB marketing head. Legend. I remember a story that he was the
[Guest 2]: one who taught me, you know, fundamentals of marketing. So what is an ad? Dude, headline,
[Guest 2]: body copy, baseline, out. So he was teaching me this whole principle of advertising in the car
[Guest 2]: one day. And we were going past Prabhadevi. And there was this creative guy also sitting, Pankaj,
[Guest 2]: next to me. And he was saying, you know, this is how the logo should be. Dude, you got to get this
[Guest 2]: right, this right. And suddenly we look outside and there is a Shiv Sena poster on the side,
[Guest 2]: Prabhadevi's signal. There is Tiger and there is Bada Saheb Thackeray. He suddenly like, dude,
[Guest 2]: who cleared that layout? And I was like, this guy is so funny. He actually got me into MTB.
[Guest 2]: But before that, again, my love for Mark McCormack made me join professional management group. So
[Guest 2]: what happened during the time when I was playing cricket, I had befriended Samir Dige. Samir Dige
[Guest 2]: was then Mumbai captain and he played for Mumbai with Sachin and the whole amazing gang, Nilesh
[Guest 2]: Kulkarni, Paras Mamre, Salil Ankola. The story that Salil Ankola, every time I meet him even
[Guest 2]: today, I'm scared of him because a ball that was pitch short, I still have the bruise in my
[Guest 2]: chest because he was very, very quick at that point of time, very strong lad. And yeah, so
[Guest 2]: Samir Dige, I knew and I called him and I said that, you know, I started this company and all.
[Guest 2]: And I don't know what to do, but I want to be in cricket. So he introduced me to Hemant Kinkre.
[Guest 2]: Hemant Kinkre is Sunil Gavaskar's cousin. And he was earlier married to Asha Bhusle's daughter.
[Guest 2]: Fabulous cricketer, good batsman for CCI. He said that, you know, I'll introduce you to Mr. Gavaskar
[Guest 2]: and Sumedh Shah, who ran professional management group, which was the only company at that point
[Guest 2]: of time, which kind of resembled, you know, this cricketing world and management kind of a world.
[Guest 2]: I met Harsha that time and I met Harsha and told him that, you know, I want to be in this space.
[Guest 2]: He said, you work in PMG. I also worked there years back. So you'll get some basic exposure there.
[Guest 2]: But it was a year's stint with that's where I started imitating Sunil Gavaskar. And, you know,
[Guest 2]: I used to do this in front of Vaishali Hotel. I don't know, Amit will not remember that I used
[Guest 2]: to gather a crowd imitating cricketers. And that is where that theater, music, cricket all came
[Guest 1]: together. And you're still at MTV at this time? No, no, no, I have not joined MTV yet. Oh my God.
[Guest 2]: So this is a stint before? This is a stint before just 8 to 10 months trying to see whether the
[Guest 2]: sports business really exists. And I realized that there is no sports business in India.
[Guest 2]: I think the sports business in India started after IPL. Till that time, it was only BCCI.
[Guest 2]: There is no business. BCCI tells you what to do, you do. If you call it business,
[Guest 2]: then it's good for you. Otherwise, there's nothing else. Then I worked with Mr. Gavaskar
[Guest 2]: and I realized that there is nothing here. And television is what I need to do. That's
[Guest 1]: what brought me to music television. Did you get Mr. Universe?
[Guest 2]: No, because it was a wrong idea.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of things I want to sort of double click on before we continue with the chronology.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is very interesting where you, you know, you speak about how when you were playing
[Amit Varma]: cricket, it was obvious to you that you're not, you know, going to be at that level. And I remember,
[Amit Varma]: I retired from chess as a 19 year old in the early 90s, when I kind of came to the same
[Amit Varma]: realization. So, you know, what is the point? And also in the particular club where I played,
[Amit Varma]: which was a fatke club in Pune in the early 90s, there were these couple of kids who were really
[Amit Varma]: good, much better than me. So I thought, okay, kids here are beating me, what's the chance outside?
[Amit Varma]: Then one became a grandmaster, one became a master. So, you know, I shouldn't have been
[Amit Varma]: too hard on myself. But the thing here is that in sport, you know, when you're not good,
[Amit Varma]: because you're getting that instant feedback, ki, you know, Salil Ankula ne bol ki, ribs pe laga,
[Amit Varma]: abhi, you know, I can't walk properly for two days. But in art, that feedback loop isn't there.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, what happens is that a lot of people who get into the arts, whether they are
[Amit Varma]: singing or writing or whatever, they think they are much better than they are. Now, there are two
[Amit Varma]: sides to this. And the negative side is you can waste a lot of time doing something you're not
[Amit Varma]: cut out for, because you don't have the self awareness. But the positive side is that you
[Amit Varma]: don't know that you suck, because everybody sucks at the start, whenever they do something,
[Amit Varma]: you don't know that you suck. So you continue. And just the sheer hard work that you then put in
[Amit Varma]: and the sheer repetition actually makes you good at it. Basically, you fake it till you make it.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I think of myself as a writer in my 20s, my writing was shit, and I didn't have the
[Amit Varma]: judgment to know it. So you know, I, you know, I wrote bad things, I thought I was a cat's whiskers.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a good thing because I you know, that self delusion just kind of keeps you going.
[Amit Varma]: So these seem to me to be two very different ways in which it plays out that in sport,
[Amit Varma]: you know exactly where you are. And you know, the work you need to do to get ahead. And that's got
[Amit Varma]: his good and bad aspects. And the good aspect of that is you can work hard and get there.
[Amit Varma]: And the bad aspect of that is that you can get disheartened, maybe you could have been something
[Amit Varma]: good, but you don't put in the work. Whereas in the arts, again, there's the same thing,
[Amit Varma]: you don't know that feedback loop is in there. And it can work in both good and bad ways.
[Guest 2]: I think it's a very important point that in sport, the metric is very clear. It's runs,
[Guest 2]: it's what you see, right. And in that under 15 game in Mumbai, when I saw Tendulkar play,
[Guest 2]: when I saw Vinod play, and while we were grafting, you know, scoring, say 25 runs in 40 balls, and
[Guest 2]: we thought the conditions were difficult. And here was a guy who had scored 120 not out in the first,
[Guest 2]: you know, first one or one and a half, two hours, and he left that match and went to Thane and
[Guest 2]: scored another 100 runs. So the benchmark was like, so high, that you were like, you're not
[Guest 2]: even in the play 11, boss, you should not be playing this game. So the metric is very, very
[Guest 2]: clear. In art, there is a very complex problem, right? Because art, you don't know what the
[Guest 2]: metric is, you also work on conviction. And everybody tells you that, boss, like, you know,
[Guest 2]: as a filmmaker, also Roshan would tell you that many a times I've seen and I worked in the movie
[Guest 2]: industry for a couple of years as well, that what is the line where you say, boss, mere creative ko
[Guest 2]: as a director, I trust. But people are telling you that your script is faulty. But no, you have to
[Guest 2]: take a call. Should you listen to the person because they say the script is faulty, or because
[Guest 2]: you've been also told that a creator has to have conviction in doing your creative work. This is
[Guest 1]: where the problem arises. No, I have a slight disagreement on this, which is the fact of saying
[Guest 1]: that, you know, when you when you work in the creative and saying that, you know, you don't
[Guest 1]: know whether you're good or you're bad or whatever, not true. What happens is, if you make your art
[Guest 1]: incestuous, if you only listen to either yourself or a few people who may be yes or yes people
[Guest 1]: around you, you're, you know, you can be in that loop of never knowing how you are. But if you put
[Guest 1]: your art to test, I can be using my cricket bat sitting inside my room and constantly practicing,
[Guest 1]: you know, what some stroke or the other, but till I don't go out and actually do it, you will never
[Guest 1]: get to know. In art, I mean, and personally, I'll tell you this, that when I moved from Lucknow to
[Guest 1]: Delhi, and when I first went out and said, I can think I'm a great debater, or I can take part in
[Guest 1]: the debate. If I lose every debate in the world, then obviously I'm not a good debater. I can get
[Guest 1]: on to radio, which is what I did next or whatever and stuff. And, you know, if I'm not moved into
[Guest 1]: A grade recording artist within three months, so, you know, I actually always set these little
[Guest 1]: targets for myself. Okay, boss, now this TV anchoring is going on. I remember at that time
[Guest 1]: with Oprah, there used to be this other, there was this male, Phil Donahue. And Donahue used to do an
[Guest 1]: interview. And one of Donahue's articles turned and said that a great career if you're on TV,
[Guest 1]: is that if you're lucky, you'll get 10 years. If you're great, you might get so if you're lucky,
[Guest 1]: you'll get five, if you're great, you'll get 10. And if you're God, you might end up getting more.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, so immediately when I 25, I did television, I said, boss, 35, but this ain't
[Guest 1]: going to end. It might not be God, but I'll manage. So I said 10 years. So I said that as a target,
[Guest 1]: you know, and I sometimes feel this that if you don't, I was at Edinburgh, you know, in August,
[Guest 1]: you're not just doing your show, you're on the road selling your show, you're standing out there
[Guest 1]: every day and saying, come see my show, come see my show and the number of people who come to your
[Guest 1]: show, then are the people who will go and tell the next set of people. So, you know, the problem is
[Guest 1]: this that very often when you get incestuous about, I remember Public Demand was a show I used to do,
[Guest 1]: I used to go out on the road, shoot every day and whatever. One day we got lazy.
[Guest 1]: We had a segment left. And because we used to be produced by TV18 in those days,
[Guest 1]: there were a bunch of TV18 interns standing outside. So the cameraman and my director said,
[Guest 1]: let's shoot here. And we shot with all of those people, got fabulous bites.
[Guest 1]: And it went into the episode. Raghav Bahl, who was the head of TV18, along with Rishi,
[Guest 1]: was the creative director, used to put up these things on the wall as a review. And I still
[Guest 1]: remember he put up this review and he said, I saw the latest episode of Public Demand, love this,
[Guest 1]: this, this, this. And by the way, that last segment is being shot with our people. If you
[Guest 1]: become so incestuous with your production, you will, if it is meant to be Public Demand, where's
[Guest 1]: the public? You know, and it really struck home for me saying that if you don't keep testing that
[Guest 1]: boundary, I worked with Vikram for years on end, right? I have seen him test that boundary. The
[Guest 1]: first time it was just an impression of X, then it became X plus Y. Then he heard a bunch of us
[Guest 1]: doing singing act. He never used to do a singing act before. He heard it and he said, I can do better
[Guest 1]: than you. And he added that. Then he saw there was, you know, I mean, I've actually tracked him
[Guest 1]: through this all because I've done it so well. But I've seen him do that. He's challenged every
[Guest 1]: boundary, tested it, whatever didn't work, he dropped it. You're conscious of your art. You know,
[Guest 1]: this conceit of art that happens sometimes, you get stuck in that. So I keep saying, my only
[Guest 1]: thing is, I'm saying, whatever you do, keep testing. If you were not able to make money from the
[Guest 1]: podcast today, Amit, with all the circles you created around it, at some point in time, you
[Guest 1]: turn and say, either I'm doing it for myself or I'll leave it. But in this, Roshan, there are two
[Guest 2]: kinds of situations. One is in the short term, like what happens in performing art, you get a
[Guest 2]: metric. In stand-up comedy, performing art, you get a metric. If someone doesn't laugh in an art show,
[Guest 2]: then you know that you're not good enough or you have to up the game. But in long-form art,
[Guest 2]: which is maybe a book, writing a book or making a film, making theater, what happens is there are
[Guest 2]: a lot of phases during that process where you are going by conviction. You're not able to take
[Guest 2]: feedback because you have to decide whether you want to do this or not. And that is where I think
[Guest 2]: many a times people have a problem because it's not there. But it's going on with conviction. But
[Guest 1]: after the movie comes, it feels like this is not it. And also I'll tell you, with Mr. Javed,
[Guest 1]: you know, all the work that I did. Once I remember, he has a poem in Tarkash,
[Guest 1]: gin gin ke sikke haath mera khurdura hua, jaati rahi lumps ki nami, bura hua. You know,
[Guest 1]: I was so busy counting money that at some point I lost the sensitivity. I lost all feeling. Very
[Guest 1]: often when we and see, we've been through this thing. We are sensitive to the world outside.
[Guest 1]: We're sensitive to all reaction. I mean, we react to everything else that's happening around us,
[Guest 1]: which creates, which in some sense, you know, provokes our art or creates our art. After a
[Guest 1]: point in time when you lose that focus and you move ahead. See, when you talk of cricket also,
[Guest 1]: here's this guy who's bowling really, really well. But there's also this guy who is just
[Guest 1]: practicing the bowling 24-7. He's also a good player. Now, your assumption, Zakir also said
[Guest 1]: a big thing in the show, that your success, you measure it from where you started.
[Guest 1]: Don't measure it from where you have reached. Because if I say today that I am rich and then
[Guest 1]: I will compare with Ambani, then where am I? But from where I started. If you can at least
[Guest 1]: do some kind of a progress report of what you have done, where you've reached, look at what you I
[Guest 1]: mean, look at where you've reached. Or I mean, Amit, when he talks about his podcasting, I hate
[Guest 1]: the 30 minute format, because today the format has evolved to where it is. But it has also evolved
[Guest 1]: because you've got feedback, you've got constant, I mean, I think you build so many feedback loops
[Amit Varma]: and building feedback loops into anything you do. But you know, okay, so I'll all of which is
[Amit Varma]: correct. And I agree with that. But I'll add a layer to that, which is that with a sportsperson,
[Amit Varma]: with a cricketer, if you're a batsman, there is one metric, it is an objective metric, it is how
[Amit Varma]: many runs you're making, you can get unlucky in one innings or whatever, but over a decent sample
[Amit Varma]: size, pata chal jata hai ki, you know, kya level hai. With art, the problem is that there are two
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of metrics, right? And one is the metric of just immediate popularity, that you're
[Amit Varma]: getting the talis now, you're getting the numbers now, and that is one kind of metric and you do
[Amit Varma]: what and you you know, you focus on that and you do whatever it takes to get you there. The other
[Amit Varma]: is a metric where you are really sort of not catering to that mass, where you're saying ki
[Amit Varma]: mujhe niche pakarna hai ya mujhe niche banana hai from scratch, there's no niche there, but I will
[Amit Varma]: make it, you know, people who have a certain sensibility who will appreciate what you do,
[Amit Varma]: where you say that those numbers don't matter. And therefore, the metric of mass popularity
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter. And you're catering to something else, which at that moment is invisible. Like,
[Amit Varma]: for example, if I had to go by the mass popularity method by what I the feedback I was getting
[Amit Varma]: through the feedbacks loop I had, everybody would have said do one hour episodes. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: initially do 20 minute episodes, you know, the point that I do the long episodes that I do
[Amit Varma]: is because I stuck to saying that I will do what I want to do. And, you know, and that will attract
[Amit Varma]: audience of a similar sensibility to me. And the only way I can become good at it is by doing it
[Amit Varma]: again and again. So even if I'm initially there is no feedback in that direction, I have to keep
[Guest 1]: doing it. But that Amitna is somewhere that I'm saying that see that that that feedback that was
[Guest 1]: coming to you was not listener feedback. It was supposed people who know podcasting, when no one
[Guest 1]: knew podcasting at that time in India. That's true. It's the Balaji problem of Netflix. Wherever any
[Guest 1]: place you go now in OTT, there is a set of people who thought they knew storytelling and boss,
[Guest 1]: we used to know GC. GC's format was different, GC's pattern was different, GC was appointment
[Guest 1]: viewing. Now it's a choice. Now if you apply that metric somewhere else, you went by your
[Guest 1]: conviction, but ultimately the conviction got ratification by today that those mad fans of
[Guest 1]: yours everywhere. I mean, I see those meetups that are happening in cities where you're traveling.
[Guest 1]: It is that ratification. It is Sathe being called by Sachin to his house saying imitate me. That
[Guest 2]: is the ultimate ratification. But you know, Amit, you're making a very, very important point and
[Guest 2]: that is something that you suffer because you put your marketing lens. I remember having a
[Guest 2]: conversation with Vijay Tendulkar, the great playwright and you know that thanks to Pune,
[Guest 2]: right? I became friends with Tendulkar. You know every Tendulkar boss. So thanks to that background
[Guest 2]: and knowing people from the theater industry, Tendulkar, Dubey had kind of become my personal
[Guest 2]: friends in my house in Bandra. They would come, they would have a drink with me, share stories
[Guest 2]: from when he wrote Gidhade and Ghashiram Kotwal. And he used to always tell me when I used to ask
[Guest 2]: him that, you know, what drove your writing? He said, mala hai vata. This is what I wanted to
[Guest 2]: tell a story. Now, the moment you go into consumer feedback and you put your marketing hat and then
[Guest 2]: you do a quintessential marketing thing that has been taught to us, what does the youth want?
[Guest 2]: Jab se main youth tha abhi tak, the only question in marketing conferences, what does the youth
[Guest 2]: want? But the moment you go into the lens of what the audience wants, I think you start killing your
[Guest 2]: creativity. Because the genesis of creativity is coming from what I have felt from the surroundings
[Guest 2]: in my Nature Nurture journey. And I am now putting it into a format which is called art,
[Guest 2]: whether it's performing art or whatever it is. And in that process, now when I put a lens of
[Guest 2]: defeats the purpose. And the problem is your first creative work is what you feel.
[Guest 2]: And unfortunately, most creative work after that is what people want. When you turn into a marketer
[Guest 2]: from a creative and very few creative people are able to maintain that integrity, probably because
[Guest 2]: they've got success in a big way in the initial phase of their career because of the original
[Guest 2]: stuff that they created, that they can afford to follow their creative field. The moment you go
[Guest 2]: that, you know, my market research tells me that 15 to 24 require this kind of humor.
[Guest 2]: And I think that the point that you make there is very critical is that
[Guest 2]: how does a creative person figure this challenge out? And that challenge for a creative remains forever.
[Guest 1]: No, no, but see that's what I'm saying that there has to be, so do not give in to the fact of
[Guest 1]: oh, the market is asking for this. But I'm saying, over a period of time, you get a set of people
[Guest 1]: who you know are giving you, like, I mean, you know, you have a set of people who you will
[Guest 1]: turn to for advice. We'll occasionally have those conversations, right? And I think building this
[Guest 1]: virtuous circle around you is an important thing. The second thing which is really important is,
[Guest 1]: I think is, a great cricketer should be able to play all three formats, true or not true?
[Guest 1]: Not true because it's a different sport.
[Guest 1]: Exactly, right? Now, that's what I'm saying. So, is he not a great cricketer?
[Guest 1]: If he didn't serve, no. So, is it a matter of conviction or is it a matter of choice?
[Guest 1]: So, I'm just saying that he knows how to play cricket. He's playing very well in the test.
[Guest 1]: One couldn't play. He didn't play T20. He's playing T20 very well. The other one couldn't play. Now,
[Guest 1]: is he, therefore, I'm saying that, see, success is not the lens of, it's not the measure on this.
[Guest 1]: Ultimately, it has to be, I know this craft and I'm doing enough with the craft. I tried this. I
[Guest 1]: tried this. I mean, I'm telling you, I'm such a big believer in experimentation and trying new
[Guest 1]: things, which is actually exactly the opposite. We have this thing all the time. You do a lot.
[Guest 1]: You know, if you don't do it, where will you see that new world? If Amit hadn't started clear
[Guest 1]: writing, I mean, I'm still dying to see your TikTok course, which we were doing on WhatsApp.
[Guest 1]: Because I want to know what was your view on it. Even today, when I'm in Dubai on another phone,
[Guest 1]: I'm watching TikTok because I want to know what is that short form format? Is there anything I
[Guest 1]: could do there? Should I do it? Not for money. The minute commerce enters the equation is very
[Guest 1]: different. Just for the second, I mean, I was doing this play. What was it? It was just testing.
[Guest 1]: Can I do it? It's completely different. It's a mad challenge. I won't get the money. It's a theater,
[Guest 1]: but it's a learning process. And he does the same. You do the same. Commerce lens,
[Guest 1]: for Satya, it's not a commerce lens because for him, it's a thing. I could have slept for so long.
[Guest 2]: That is so true. I do it. There's a time when he was doing 20 shows a month. And then,
[Guest 1]: now I'm tired. Should I do it? Make it? No. And that is him because that time away,
[Guest 1]: when he's sitting at home and he does these meetings in Pune, or he's doing, you know,
[Guest 1]: work around spot is when you're actually fermenting new ideas, create, that is the joy. That I think
[Guest 2]: is really the best part of the process. And I think, you know, consumer feedback is a problem
[Guest 2]: for creative. Big problem. And I would like to believe that in the past during, even in Bollywood,
[Guest 2]: if you say the, you know, time when Raj Kapoor and, you know, your metric of failure was only
[Guest 2]: box office. People didn't, it was not like the social media technology changed the game completely
[Guest 2]: because now you are getting negative feedback from people who have no understanding. They've
[Guest 2]: not even seen your work. And that's a problem because today, if Raj Kapoor made a bad film
[Guest 2]: or, you know, Prithviraj Kapoor did some bad play or whatever. It wasn't fun. That's all the
[Guest 2]: feedback we used to get. Today, the problem is that the creative is afraid to cross the creative boundary.
[Guest 2]: Because he's saying, no, this is on social media. These people curse. I'll make a meme of this type,
[Guest 2]: that will work better. And I think the biggest challenge, the good thing about technology,
[Guest 2]: we discovered more creative people. That was the good thing. But I think good creative people
[Guest 2]: are going to get scared to put out newer forms of creative work only because it's not popular.
[Amit Varma]: So when I used to teach my podcasting course, I remember at one point, somebody asked a question,
[Amit Varma]: sir, where are the gaps in the market? And I was like, boss, this is a very wrong view.
[Amit Varma]: Because if there are gaps in the market, a million people will go for them, find them,
[Amit Varma]: do whatever. The point is, the only thing that makes you unique among the 7 billion people on
[Amit Varma]: the planet is you. So you just be authentic to yourself and do what you have to do. Now,
[Amit Varma]: the thing with feedback loops also is that they take a long period of time. Like honestly, Roshan,
[Amit Varma]: even with my podcast first three or four years, even, I had no idea that I was doing something
[Amit Varma]: which was really valued by people. It was just, you know, I liked it, I kept doing it, I got some
[Amit Varma]: feedback, I felt good. It was only after COVID when I said, okay, whoever wants to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: contribute financially to the show, you can do so, open that page. Suddenly, month one, I was like,
[Amit Varma]: like, what is happening, you know, that's when I kind of realized. And then with the clear writing
[Amit Varma]: course, when people signed up, that's when I kind of began to interface with those people and
[Amit Varma]: realized that it means so much to so many people. But otherwise, it is a completely dispersed thing.
[Amit Varma]: And I have no idea. But once I know, then I can double down on the things that I find of value in
[Amit Varma]: it. And what you're saying what creators Vikram is so true, because if you are chasing the numbers,
[Amit Varma]: everybody is going to the lowest common denominator. And secondly, today, we are in a space
[Amit Varma]: where AI is going to do that way better than us. You know, if you look at and friends,
[Amit Varma]: abhi toh GPT 3.5 chal raha hai, but GPT 4, some friends of mine have seen it in private, and they
[Amit Varma]: are raving about it. They're saying it's mad. And, you know, we are recording this at the
[Amit Varma]: start of December, but what we so even the GPT we see today is not at the level it will, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's going to just exponentially get better. So I think for an artist, you know, you have to
[Amit Varma]: not chase gaps in the market, as it were, but just do.
[Guest 1]: To add to what you said, or whatever, this morning, I saw something incredible. There's a
[Guest 1]: show called Wednesday, which is currently taking the world by storm and whatever, you know, and,
[Guest 1]: and I wonder who watches what nowadays, because it's crazy. Now, Jenna Ortega, this girl who's
[Guest 1]: in the show, who in the last 10 days, has gone to from 2.3 million followers to 12.3, a million
[Guest 1]: followers every day she's added, she's just acting in the show. She's a brilliant actress, what she's
[Guest 1]: doing, I think she really gives so much to the character, but it's directed by Tim Burton.
[Guest 1]: Tim Burton's vision is visible in every frame that you see.
[Guest 1]: Aur ek zamane mein woh cult tha, mass nahi tha.
[Guest 1]: Boss, Edward Scissorhand, etc. ke time pe aap keh rahe the, oh,
[Guest 1]: Beetlejuice, kya ho raha hai. But that's what I'm saying, but you know, he has conviction in himself.
[Guest 1]: Jenna Ortega will find it very difficult after Wednesday gets over, though it'll obviously run
[Guest 1]: into multiple seasons, to, that when she does her next work, if it doesn't get this appreciated,
[Guest 1]: because this dopamine hitna of constant like, like, like, like jo hai, which is why I say that
[Guest 1]: over a period of time, mein toh yaar kuch 15 ghar ghar chuka ho, toh mujhe pata hota hai,
[Guest 1]: I've been, you know, people say, oh, so, I said, nahi, boss, aapko success dikhti hai, failure
[Guest 1]: mujhe dik chuka hai, bohot baar dikha hai, chhoti chhoti cheezon mein dikha hai, yeh show banaya,
[Guest 1]: nahi chala, yeh kara nahi chala, film mein kara nahi chala, yeh hua. But the fact is that I'm
[Guest 1]: constantly keeping up with this whole space of saying, try new things, have a set of people,
[Guest 1]: and it's not, I'm not asking you for feedback, but even if I have the conversation with you,
[Guest 2]: there is enough to take away. See, the problem is that everybody, whether you are a theater actor,
[Guest 2]: whether you are, you know, say, Bollywood actor, whether you are probably, you know, making,
[Guest 2]: you're a sculptor, everybody can't get an 8 billion audience. And this is a standard problem
[Guest 2]: that we have even in sport. And many times I go and I'm talking about the game, everybody says,
[Guest 2]: sir, you are cricket, you don't know how wrestlers are suffering, you don't know how chess players
[Guest 2]: are suffering. And I said, you know, you have to understand that every sport has a different
[Guest 2]: audience. And just because something is 10,000 crores doesn't mean 50 crore is bad. A small
[Guest 2]: scale company doesn't, you know, just because Reliance is a big company doesn't mean a bearings
[Guest 2]: manufacturer in Pune is bad. He has his own space, Reliance has his own space, so you're saying that
[Guest 2]: everybody has to become a big company. There won't be any space for MSMEs. Similarly, there is a chess market, but you have to think whether you are at the top of that chess market or not.
[Guest 2]: But unfortunately, everybody wants to become cricket and a, you know, 10 billion dollar company. And
[Guest 2]: there is no argument, right? If we are going to play Khokho or we are going to play Atta Patta or
[Guest 2]: we are going to try to make these, you know, sports that have been there in India for a while
[Guest 2]: successful, why are we looking at cricket? Let's make a successful 5 crore enterprise.
[Guest 2]: Let's make that sport, you know, successful in that particular segment and therefore get the
[Guest 2]: economics right in that segment. But unfortunately, every conference you go to, you know, this is the
[Guest 2]: problem. Badminton should be the new cricket. It doesn't happen like that. Couple of thoughts on this.
[Amit Varma]: One, of course, is from the Creator Economy, where Kevin Kelly wrote that famous essay 12 years back,
[Amit Varma]: Thousand True Fans, where the thesis is, don't think of it anymore in terms of winner takes all,
[Amit Varma]: which the entertainment industry has been before that the people at the 1% will make all the money
[Amit Varma]: and the rest are strugglers in Versova cafes. But instead, you know, if you get 1000 true fans
[Amit Varma]: who are willing to pay $100 a year for your work, that's enough. And we see that on Substack with
[Amit Varma]: some the standard subscription model is $100 a year and you have many previously unknown
[Amit Varma]: Substackers making a decent amount of money with that. That's sort of one aspect of it that you
[Amit Varma]: don't have to necessarily reach out to all those people. So, you know, so, on this, there's this
[Guest 1]: new podcast, which is being done by the Bombay Shaving, I hope I don't take the wrong company's
[Guest 1]: name, but you know, the Shantanu, this guy who's an entrepreneur has been doing and he's talking
[Guest 1]: about entrepreneurship. And one person in that podcast we interviewed said this saying that,
[Guest 1]: you know, a tennis player, right? The he said that 100 tennis player earns about half a million
[Guest 1]: dollars and the top guy earns this. And he did exactly this. He said, look at badminton,
[Guest 1]: where the number one player earns X and the number 100 perhaps earns nothing.
[Guest 1]: Said, you know, the comparison, you should know the extent to which you are playing.
[Guest 1]: That whole thing which you used to occasionally which you joked about saying that Mr. Gavaskar
[Guest 1]: is very upset even today about the fact that he didn't make money from cricket.
[Guest 1]: Because the time when he was there, cricket was not a money-making sport.
[Guest 1]: Now today, it's such a money-making sport. But he made the maximum money in his tennis
[Unknown]: which he forgets. Which is what I'm saying, that's what I keep saying. But Satish, that's what I'm
[Guest 1]: saying that do not, see because I was an anchor to a very large degree, I often had to stay in
[Guest 1]: this thing of, he has a car, he has this, he has that. I don't know what it was, I don't know whether
[Guest 1]: it is the Lucknow or Bringing, whatever it is, but I never compared. But I said, where have I come from?
[Guest 2]: Exactly, Roshan, the problem here is in cricket as well as in Bollywood.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: In cricket as well as in IPL, only 20 people are earning multimillion salaries.
[Guest 2]: Correct.
[Guest 2]: The remaining 100 players are in the small range. Similarly, even in our entertainment industry,
[Guest 2]: you take the 20 Bollywood stars out, you take the 5 or 6 TV stars out,
[Unknown]: rest are not going to make that much money. But the aspiration of those guys is to become Ranveer
[Guest 2]: Singh. Now, the moment you start comparing yourself with Ranveer Singh's annual income,
[Guest 2]: you have stopped growing. The problem is, in every field, you want everyone in that entire
[Guest 2]: ecosystem to become the unicorn of that field. And unless we reconcile to the fact that even the
[Guest 2]: smaller guys are viable, as long as you are viable, as long as you know that you can continue
[Guest 2]: building good sportsmen or good artists in that sphere, you should be happy. But then if you also
[Guest 2]: want 150 million likes like Cristiano Ronaldo, when you are playing probably Kabaddi in Tiruchirappalli,
[Guest 2]: then you should be worried about how your success in that state is, rather than getting followers.
[Guest 1]: Of course, see what's happening with startups, right? I mean, over the last three years,
[Guest 1]: and also this thing about suddenly, I mean, everybody will join whichever new trend is
[Guest 1]: coming. But now startups, remember that I used to joke and say that in the late 80s,
[Guest 1]: if you didn't do anything, people would ask you, what do you do? You would say, I work in PR.
[Unknown]: Then a few years later, you would turn and say, what do you do? I work in event management.
[Guest 1]: Right? It continued. And last was, I work in digital. Now it was, I'm an entrepreneur.
[Guest 1]: Everybody is a startup entrepreneur. And even if you lose your job, how will you get credibility?
[Guest 1]: I'm a startup. I'm just working on my startup. Now, my problem, and because of my thing,
[Guest 1]: saying investor, because I invested a bunch of startups or whatever. There's a set of emails every
[Guest 1]: day. And I promise you, they're a case study. Because I have seen your life, I want to become
[Guest 1]: you, blah, blah, blah, blah. I've got this idea that no one else has ever had. You know, and ideas
[Guest 1]: are a dime a dozen. Where's the implementation? What will you do? The true entrepreneur will be
[Guest 1]: seen right now when this funding winter is going on. Yeah, suddenly there's a big funding.
[Guest 1]: Now we'll know who's actually in how much water. People, see, the rising tide carries all boats.
[Guest 1]: But now we'll know when it's coming down, who's in how much water. Right? Suddenly,
[Guest 1]: those same people who are giving you that $100 million check are not even cutting you. I mean,
[Guest 1]: they actually say, I'm sorry, no more money. Two of my friends had to exit. I exited a company last
[Guest 1]: time because I thought I was getting great value. I said, no, no, this is 5x more. Called me two
[Guest 1]: weeks back and he said, you know, I had to take a haircut and take what you, 30% of what you took,
[Guest 1]: because they said, market's completely changed. So this thing now of following, chasing that
[Guest 1]: trend, become a TikTok star, become this, basic talent, first see who that is. I have never taken
[Amit Varma]: a haircut. And our second, we'll come to Conhead later. You know, you mentioned startup. So I
[Amit Varma]: remembered the second point I wanted to make with the thousand two fans point, which was that I did
[Amit Varma]: an episode with Vinay Singhal. Right now, Vinay Singhal is one guy who said, I won't follow the
[Amit Varma]: trend. He started this company called Stage. Have you heard of? Yeah. So what Stage decided
[Amit Varma]: was that we will be an OTT for Bharat, but not an OTT for Bharat in terms of Hindi, Punjabi,
[Amit Varma]: in these major languages, but for the dialects. Now, I had always thought that, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: with urbanization and the forces of capitalism and people going for scale, that there's going
[Amit Varma]: to be a certain homogenization, that you grow up in a Haryana village, you have a particular
[Amit Varma]: dialect, you go to a city, but then your incentives are to learn the languages of the city, which
[Amit Varma]: could be Hindi, if it's a north city, or it could be English, and gradually dialects die. And
[Amit Varma]: Vinay's narrative has a lot of this happening in the first part of his life, where he is embarrassed
[Amit Varma]: of his dialect, he speaks about a struggle learning English, and then he speaks about a struggle
[Amit Varma]: learning Hindi, you know, and so but he started an OTT for dialects like Haryanvi, Bhojpuri and
[Amit Varma]: Rajasthani, I think are the three that they have now. And that's worked remarkably well, they've
[Amit Varma]: got a lakh and a half subscribers at Netflix rates. And I see a movement towards the opposite
[Amit Varma]: direction now, again, fueled by capitalism, but also with the aid of technology, which is
[Amit Varma]: empowering individual creators, where a creator can today go out there and say, okay, I am Haryanvi,
[Amit Varma]: I talk like this, but I'm proud of it, I'm going to own it, you know, I'm not going to try to fit
[Amit Varma]: in, I don't care where the large market is, I will own it. And those markets are now taking shape,
[Amit Varma]: like when I spoke about this reverse migration from Bollywood, that earlier Haryanvi kids used to
[Amit Varma]: come to Bombay, to work in Bollywood, and today they are going back. And I find this very
[Amit Varma]: interesting, because what this means, to me, is a semi permanent shift away from the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: being everything, there will still be a mainstream, but it will no longer be everything, that people
[Amit Varma]: will also have their own ecosystems where, you know, but there'll be dispersed audiences, there'll
[Amit Varma]: be whatever, but they can form the like, I have my little ecosystems, which I as a consumer,
[Amit Varma]: which I keep dipping into, like including chess, for example, which you guys might not even know
[Amit Varma]: are there, and it doesn't matter. And they are big enough to be successful, you no longer need scale.
[Guest 1]: And they are financially viable. Yeah. No, but are you comfortable with the niche,
[Guest 1]: that Haryanvi actor going back and working on the stage has to be comfortable currently with
[Guest 1]: the fact that it will be perhaps a 100 crore economy. Now, if he again goes back to the
[Guest 1]: Ranveer Singh comparison, he'll be sitting and saying, yaar, yaha ka Hussar Ranveer ban diya, lekin wahan ka kab ban diya.
[Guest 2]: But kya hai Roshan, jab yeh organize hoega, aur iska evolution hoga, toh uska jo revenue hai, probably will be better than many Bollywood actors here.
[Guest 2]: Possibly. Forget the top 8-10, but if I am a Haryana ka Ranveer Singh, I will make more money than a whole lot of people in mainstream Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: But my point is, you don't have to be Haryana ka Ranveer Singh, you can be Haryana ka whatever, Gajraj Rao.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely. But the fact that Gajraj Rao can survive and make money in Haryanvi is a great thing.
[Guest 1]: And the other unique thing that will happen over a period of time is once you get comfortable with
[Guest 1]: telling stories in your own Basha Boli, as he said, that beautiful line, right?
[Guest 1]: Ke main apni boli mein, apni dialect mein kahaani batara hu, phir aap dusri cheez karenge, aap pehle toh apni kahaaniya batayenge.
[Guest 1]: And when the stories are deeply personal, they are absolutely universal. Yeah, right. So when a
[Guest 1]: parasite suddenly wins an Oscar, it's why? Because, and this is where I believe that AI etc is going to
[Guest 1]: say, here is a Haryanvi thing, but I'm able to dub it. I'm currently working with two startups,
[Guest 1]: where these guys are doing dubbing, which is going to sync. So first, it will take any dialect, as
[Guest 1]: long as the AI has got the ability to translate that, right? So from audio to text, then it'll
[Guest 1]: take the text, translate it into another language. It'll contextualize with a human individual to see
[Guest 1]: whether that is working. And then it's going to lay it back in another emotional voice. Now,
[Guest 1]: imagine what will happen to content then. Then it'll be the success of the story.
[Guest 1]: And that's what I'm saying. And therefore, going deeply niche is actually going to bring about
[Guest 2]: something unique. And I'm hoping for that. And I think what it will also do is that if at one
[Guest 2]: point of time for 100 years, only aspirational cool dudes have been mainstream Bollywood actor,
[Guest 2]: it will slowly get cut. And suppose I'm a boy from Haryana, I'm seeing that my hero is a Haryana star. And he also has a BMW 7 series, which used to be only with Ranveer Singh.
[Guest 2]: The moment all those parameters come in my local hero, then my need to relate to Ranveer Singh or
[Guest 2]: probably any Bollywood actor is much lesser, because I know that my heroes also have it.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, I think it will kind of equalize. And that is probably the reason the South Indian stars in the past, Rajinikanth wanted to come and do mainstream Hindi films.
[Guest 1]: They don't want to do it anymore.
[Guest 2]: Now, why would they want to? They might just want to do it because they want to. We also need a North Indian audience. But now that problem has been solved.
[Guest 2]: North Indian audience is now watching South Indian films.
[Guest 1]: The Pushpa you saw, sorry I'm just butting in, but the Pushpa you saw in Hindi, because you saw it in Hindi, was dubbed by Shreyas Talpade.
[Guest 1]: And dubbed so beautifully, Dharivedi is standing and saying, boss, look at that level of dubbing.
[Guest 1]: And that's what made the film. They didn't change the film.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: And the problem that Bollywood is doing right now, by the way, because so many of my friends tell me this.
[Guest 1]: They say, now what happens is, boss, they make South type films. No, brother.
[Guest 1]: It runs there. It's their narrative.
[Guest 1]: He can tie a lungi and slide his slippers there.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: If you do it in Bombay, someone will slap you.
[Guest 2]: The thing is, sir, conventionally in India, from Punjab and North India, we look, because they had a celebratory culture.
[Guest 2]: They wore nice clothes.
[Guest 2]: So an aspiration was made that we have to become this.
[Guest 2]: But now what is it that if people who look the same in every state are speaking in Haryanvi or Gujarati, then my aspiration is over.
[Guest 2]: I don't want to do a Bollywood film because my hero is sitting here.
[Guest 2]: And I think that will be a very, very good thing for India.
[Guest 1]: The appetite in this city at the moment, I say, I was telling Amit about the concert market or whatever.
[Guest 1]: Saying that there are three cities in India that make money, which is Delhi, Bombay and Ahmedabad.
[Guest 1]: These are the only ones where you can make money off big concerts.
[Guest 1]: But today, who's stopping you from taking those 20 and 90 other cities where there is the money.
[Guest 1]: You just need to figure out what is the model and take those shows there and make money.
[Guest 1]: But no one does it.
[Guest 1]: Everybody wants to make a name here.
[Guest 1]: There are hundreds of places.
[Guest 1]: And India, the opportunity that is India right now.
[Guest 1]: Honestly, and people say this thing that okay, for everything that is wrong in the last so many years of governance or whatever.
[Guest 1]: The growth of the small city when you think about it is mind blowing.
[Guest 1]: And what have you given them?
[Guest 1]: You gave them infrastructure.
[Guest 1]: You gave them IT.
[Guest 1]: And now boss, the road is open.
[Guest 1]: They have the hunger.
[Guest 1]: They have the hunger and hiring people from smaller cities.
[Guest 1]: People say, oh, there's a Lucknow quota.
[Guest 2]: This is the ultimate thing.
[Guest 2]: I say, recruit people who don't know English.
[Amit Varma]: More hunger, more desire.
[Amit Varma]: There's a selection bias that they've come so far as to reach you.
[Guest 2]: So they wanted that much more.
[Amit Varma]: Look at sport and look at Haryana.
[Guest 2]: I mean, today, no fast bowler from urban places will go beyond 120.
[Guest 2]: Because he's not seen distance that long.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm very, I'm very struck by what Roshan said about, you know, that tell your story in Haryanvi and all stories are universal and it will reach everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm reminded of Ayn Rand's quote about how the smallest minority is an individual.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the biggest niche is an individual.
[Amit Varma]: If you're just true to yourself, it will reach everybody, which is a big lesson here.
[Amit Varma]: And also I could see Vikram's brain working overtime when you mentioned that AI, which will do the dubbing and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And what is he thinking?
[Amit Varma]: It's the age of deepfake.
[Amit Varma]: Anybody's voice can be done.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you put an AI to work on all three of us.
[Guest 2]: We don't need to physically talk and have this conversation.
[Guest 2]: AI will have the conversation.
[Guest 2]: AI will make Tony Gregg's voice.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, correct.
[Guest 1]: I'm telling you, Vikram is always working towards what is the highest output with the least input.
[Amit Varma]: I am the king of minimal input.
[Amit Varma]: That's leveraging.
[Amit Varma]: That's wise.
[Unknown]: And I sat with him and said, Vikram, let's do this.
[Guest 1]: You do it.
[Guest 1]: He said to me, he'll support me to death.
[Guest 1]: But it's crazy.
[Guest 1]: My frustration.
[Guest 1]: Why would you do this?
[Guest 1]: Let's do it.
[Unknown]: Because I can see the effort.
[Guest 1]: I'm sorry, I've got it.
[Guest 1]: When we went to celebrate his 40th, my wife said, Vikram, you can look happy.
[Guest 1]: I am.
[Unknown]: Look, sir, I don't like this surprise concept.
[Guest 2]: You had a surprise party.
[Guest 2]: He had a surprise party.
[Unknown]: Look, I say all this, but control is very important to me.
[Unknown]: If you have given a surprise, then it is not in my control.
[Unknown]: This means I am nothing.
[Unknown]: So you can't surprise your 50th party.
[Guest 2]: I don't plan a surprise party.
[Amit Varma]: For yourself.
[Unknown]: It will be a surprise if you execute it.
[Unknown]: Oh God.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get back to your chronology, I wanted to double click on something else that you said, which was fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Where you said that what you need to get ahead in life is to have 5 friends, 5 business contacts, and you get by.
[Amit Varma]: And what I was thinking about that is that one, I sort of agree with the importance of friends.
[Amit Varma]: So I have realized late in life that one has to be intentional.
[Amit Varma]: Like I've lost touch with so many people.
[Amit Varma]: Same laziness.
[Amit Varma]: Who's going to make the effort?
[Amit Varma]: I'll have to write an email.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: You know, he remembers me.
[Amit Varma]: So but now I try to make more of an effort to, you know, stay in touch with friends and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I am wondering about the role of intentionality in this.
[Amit Varma]: Like even in whatever little career I had, you know, I was never a person who wanted to go out networking.
[Amit Varma]: That meet people and hand out a visiting card in the age where visiting cards existed and do all of that.
[Amit Varma]: That just wasn't for me.
[Amit Varma]: I was like, if I like talking to you, I'll talk to you.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, you know, I'm not going to make the effort.
[Amit Varma]: But how important is intentionality to this?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's one thing to say that these are the friends who help me and these are the people who help my business.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, it's one thing to come at it post-facto.
[Amit Varma]: And it's another to say that I need to cultivate friends.
[Amit Varma]: I need to stay in touch with my five friends.
[Amit Varma]: I need to stay in touch with, you know, I need to make business contacts.
[Amit Varma]: Because I don't know when they will come in handy.
[Amit Varma]: And that second attitude is very difficult for me.
[Amit Varma]: Though in the context of friends, I'm trying to do it.
[Amit Varma]: In the context of business, my mind just doesn't think like that.
[Amit Varma]: So, how much is that intentionality important?
[Guest 2]: So, I struggled with the same.
[Guest 2]: Because I came from a middle-class Pune family.
[Guest 2]: And which, you know, even your skills that you have, you're not supposed to display it.
[Guest 2]: Let your work speak for itself.
[Guest 2]: It's not important to market yourself.
[Guest 2]: This is where I come from.
[Guest 2]: So, even I thought that intentionally making friends with someone,
[Guest 2]: this means that you're taking work out of me, this is not the right lens you should go.
[Guest 2]: And I continued with this thought for a long time.
[Guest 2]: So, whatever 4-5 friends I had, they were natural friends.
[Guest 2]: It was fun to spend time with them in Vaishali.
[Guest 2]: And it automatically happened that I invested in them.
[Guest 2]: There was no intentionality.
[Guest 2]: But then I met a very interesting guy who's a very close friend of mine.
[Guest 2]: Whose name is Sunandan Lele.
[Guest 2]: And he's somebody, you know, one of the most eminent cricket journalists
[Guest 2]: that has been in our part of the world.
[Guest 2]: Most importantly, he's somebody who is what I call Jag Mitra.
[Guest 2]: He has close to 5000 friends across the world.
[Guest 2]: There is no cricketer who's not his best friend.
[Guest 2]: And I used to go on tours.
[Guest 2]: I started touring since 2002-2003.
[Guest 2]: Up until Tendulkar retired actively in 2013.
[Guest 2]: And then 3-4 years and then I stopped touring.
[Guest 2]: And I was like amazed by this guy.
[Unknown]: That he intentionally...
[Guest 2]: See, he loves people.
[Guest 2]: So, he doesn't have to do it from life.
[Guest 2]: But he told me one thing.
[Guest 2]: He said, Vikram, when are we happy?
[Guest 2]: I said, when somebody acknowledges us.
[Guest 2]: There is a deep engagement.
[Guest 2]: Someone says something good to me.
[Guest 2]: Basic things, right?
[Guest 2]: What is happiness?
[Guest 2]: Positive thoughts, engagement, relationships, acknowledgement, meaning of life.
[Guest 2]: On these 5 pillars, happiness, dopamine production is dependent.
[Guest 2]: So, if you like these things,
[Guest 2]: it means others like it too.
[Guest 2]: So, if you are giving happiness to someone,
[Unknown]: then why do you have intention and guilt in it?
[Guest 2]: If randomly you have to go to Roshan and say,
[Guest 2]: Roshan, I think what you did was nice.
[Guest 2]: Even if it is false.
[Guest 2]: But if it makes somebody happy, this is the greatest charity you can do.
[Guest 2]: That's the perspective he got in me.
[Guest 2]: And I realized that spending time with him,
[Guest 2]: he would go out of the way.
[Guest 2]: The first tour I did with him in South Africa,
[Guest 2]: the driver who came to pick us up at Johannesburg airport,
[Guest 2]: 20 years later, he is the same guy who comes and picks him up.
[Guest 2]: Why?
[Guest 2]: Because Sunandan took a small purse for his wife from Tulsi Bagh, Pune.
[Guest 2]: What would be in it?
[Guest 2]: He said, human relationship is the only reason we should exist on this planet.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, whether it is Tendulkar Kohli,
[Guest 2]: if at all Virat Kohli talks to anybody in the journalism fraternity,
[Guest 2]: it's Sunandan Lele.
[Guest 2]: Because Sunandan Lele believes that a gift is a thought transfer
[Guest 2]: that happens from one person to another.
[Guest 2]: It is not that I came to you with a bottle of wine.
[Guest 2]: If you haven't thought about it,
[Guest 2]: and you haven't brought the correct gift for it,
[Guest 2]: then your gift has no value.
[Guest 2]: These are the values that he taught me.
[Guest 2]: What a great perspective.
[Guest 2]: He's saying, my job is to make people happy.
[Guest 1]: You knew me all these years, you didn't learn this from me?
[Guest 2]: And because you said it, now you know why.
[Amit Varma]: And everything you've told Roshan about him is false.
[Guest 1]: Just to make him happy.
[Guest 2]: So the positive things out of this is that Sunandan calls me from London once
[Guest 2]: and says that, Vikram, gift value is not important.
[Guest 2]: He said, this small purse I gave to the media manager at Wimbledon,
[Guest 2]: I'm just watching Roger Federer live at Centre Court.
[Guest 2]: So what I learned from him is that this guilt of making other people happy
[Guest 2]: and feel important, why am I living with this?
[Guest 2]: On the contrary, I should develop this skill,
[Guest 2]: whether it is helpful in business or whether it's helpful in life,
[Amit Varma]: it does not matter.
[Amit Varma]: But do it for his own sake.
[Guest 2]: Do it for his own sake.
[Guest 2]: Because his life is, I mean, charity.
[Guest 2]: Today we are giving millions of dollars for people's upliftment.
[Guest 2]: Just be nice to them.
[Guest 2]: Just do a little bit of an act which makes them happy.
[Guest 2]: And that changed my perspective.
[Guest 2]: And I realized that I don't do one-tenth of what he does.
[Guest 2]: And Roshan knows that I don't keep in touch,
[Guest 2]: generally because again, laziness and forgetfulness and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: But the value of that, I understood thanks to Sunandan Lele.
[Guest 2]: And even today, if you go to any part of the world,
[Guest 2]: whether it is the West Indies, whether it is Australia,
[Guest 2]: the only person who's the best friend of John Bradman is Sunandan Lele.
[Guest 2]: John Bradman does not associate with anybody
[Guest 2]: because of the baggage of being Donald Bradman's son.
[Guest 2]: But every tour, he will come and meet Sunandan at Melbourne or Sydney or whatever
[Guest 2]: and say that, Mr. Lele, you are the man of this world.
[Guest 2]: And that I used to see and say, wow, man, wow.
[Guest 2]: Even Tendulkar today would call Sunandan and say that I am doing this.
[Guest 2]: Do you think this is right?
[Guest 2]: He has most advisors because the trust,
[Guest 2]: amount of charity work that I did with Sunandan,
[Guest 2]: because he said that, boss, this is your duty to help others
[Guest 2]: because you are one of the 0.1% of the humanity
[Guest 2]: who is talking about cricket and you are getting paid to joke.
[Guest 2]: So that when I saw and then I realized that, yes, boss, it's about relationships
[Guest 2]: and you should not be awkward.
[Guest 2]: On the contrary, it should be part of your checklist on a daily basis.
[Guest 2]: That's where that intentionality and that guilt
[Guest 2]: that I am selfish, all those issues got sorted.
[Guest 1]: No, I don't know.
[Guest 1]: And honestly, I genuinely believe in intentionality.
[Guest 1]: I think it's been the defining part of what I have been all my life
[Guest 1]: because these guys know that I am number one a problem solver.
[Guest 1]: So if you give it to me, I will solve it.
[Guest 1]: I must solve it.
[Guest 1]: I'll try my best to solve it if I can.
[Guest 1]: And I try to solve it.
[Guest 1]: And this is my parents that I'm not doing it with my Kaploo fitting.
[Guest 1]: What will I get is not at all important.
[Guest 1]: So I think that is something which has worked for me.
[Guest 1]: I remember when I had gone to the first ThinkFest or whatever, etc.
[Guest 1]: After two days of great conversation or whatever, we had only met.
[Guest 1]: And I said, man, after this, there should be a DoFest.
[Guest 1]: Because everyone thinks, talks a lot, dreams are discussed a lot.
[Guest 1]: Even dogs think.
[Guest 1]: And finally implementing it, because I somehow find that this ability or just this bias to action, to do things, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, to make this recording happen, to push for this conversation.
[Guest 1]: It makes all of us richer, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, I'm getting to know parts of society that I don't know.
[Guest 1]: And I'm like, wow.
[Guest 1]: I didn't know this.
[Guest 1]: I didn't know about your chess.
[Guest 1]: So these are discoveries that you will make.
[Guest 1]: I'm sorry, I'm going back to something which I did very recently.
[Guest 1]: But I'm not a professional actor.
[Guest 1]: It's been a hobby.
[Guest 1]: I've been more, I used to act.
[Guest 1]: And then suddenly because I started writing and directing, in every play I used to do, I would do a little walk-on.
[Guest 1]: Because it was fun and people used to enjoy it.
[Guest 1]: And they knew me as a face on television.
[Guest 1]: So it used to add some value.
[Guest 1]: But I genuinely wasn't acting to a thing.
[Guest 1]: I finished Aladdin 2018.
[Guest 1]: I did that also at that point because a bunch of my friends said, listen, just do it.
[Guest 1]: I mean, what are you scared of?
[Guest 1]: And I knew that I was a little scared of dancing on stage.
[Guest 1]: Singing, I'm not scared of.
[Guest 1]: Acting, I'm not scared of.
[Guest 1]: But again, I was doing it for a month.
[Guest 1]: I got tons of offers for acting after that.
[Guest 1]: And every time I would do a couple of auditions.
[Guest 1]: Tess Joseph is a very dear friend of mine.
[Guest 1]: Wonderful casting director.
[Guest 1]: And she somehow has this big belief in me as an actor.
[Guest 1]: And she keeps calling me for wonderful films.
[Guest 1]: I on two occasions even got the roles.
[Guest 1]: And then the dates didn't match.
[Guest 1]: When suddenly this play happened to me in September and whatever, you know.
[Guest 1]: And out of the blue, Dilip Shankar who was casting, who I was asking for help in my film in 2011.
[Guest 1]: Suddenly reaches out and says, listen, I've got a reverse thing for you.
[Guest 1]: Which is will you read for Lalit.
[Guest 1]: And Lalit Verma in Monsoon Wedding.
[Guest 1]: And I had remembered the film.
[Guest 1]: And I said, for me the first thing was Naseer Saab Ka Role.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, that thing that you say, the thick and thin desire.
[Guest 1]: So suddenly this thing, oh my God, I'll get to do that role.
[Guest 1]: I worked my butt off.
[Guest 1]: Did the audition.
[Guest 1]: Was very scared.
[Guest 1]: For one week I was like, oh my God, but it's a song.
[Guest 1]: The one song I heard was very classical.
[Guest 1]: I said, I won't be able to get a note.
[Guest 1]: I actually thought of satay at that time.
[Guest 1]: Saying, I'll sing this.
[Guest 1]: I don't know if I'll be able to sing it or not.
[Guest 1]: You know, it's a scale or not.
[Guest 1]: I said, I'll get it.
[Guest 1]: You know, three months.
[Guest 1]: We did 12 shows in Doha.
[Guest 1]: There was a very good audience.
[Guest 1]: Some people globally saw it.
[Guest 1]: Whatever, the play will travel internationally.
[Guest 1]: It will become big.
[Guest 1]: But what I learnt from the people around me.
[Guest 1]: You know, and not, see I could also go there.
[Guest 1]: Amit, every morning.
[Guest 1]: Do my lines.
[Guest 1]: Sit in a corner.
[Guest 1]: Have my assistant with me.
[Guest 1]: Give me my cup of coffee.
[Guest 1]: Go into my room.
[Guest 1]: No.
[Guest 1]: There was this girl, Sharwari Deshpande.
[Guest 1]: Who was acting opposite me.
[Guest 1]: Brilliant actress.
[Guest 1]: And I just said.
[Guest 1]: I said, you know, you're present in every scene.
[Guest 1]: I'm not.
[Guest 1]: My mind is racing on a hundred things.
[Guest 1]: How do you do it?
[Guest 1]: She told me.
[Guest 1]: You know, I studied this in my masters in theatre.
[Guest 1]: Why don't you do this?
[Guest 1]: I took three books.
[Guest 1]: Now I'm studying something on perspectives in theatre.
[Guest 1]: I'm studying something on breathing.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: It's giving me something.
[Guest 1]: I have a 30 year old music director.
[Guest 1]: Who I think is a genius.
[Guest 1]: Never got flapped.
[Guest 1]: Emily Whittaker, 30 years old.
[Guest 1]: Standing there and just playing the music.
[Guest 1]: And we had one song changed a day before the play.
[Guest 1]: Day before the play.
[Guest 1]: Because some rights issues happened.
[Guest 1]: And this girl is sitting there.
[Guest 1]: Figuring out.
[Guest 1]: With the entire orchestra in two hours.
[Guest 1]: And then you sit and say.
[Guest 1]: But where do you do this?
[Guest 1]: Or where does.
[Guest 1]: But if one intention is to work.
[Guest 1]: The other intention is to invest in people.
[Guest 1]: People don't invest in people that often.
[Guest 1]: I feel that if you invest in people.
[Guest 1]: And Sathe knows this.
[Guest 1]: I will chase him down.
[Guest 1]: And follow.
[Guest 1]: And he is in Pune.
[Guest 1]: And he is there.
[Guest 1]: And whatever.
[Guest 1]: And I know.
[Guest 1]: Because I understand the kind of person.
[Guest 1]: I also.
[Guest 1]: Like for example.
[Guest 1]: I realize that you.
[Guest 1]: You have a small set of people.
[Guest 1]: Who you like to meet.
[Guest 1]: Or whatever.
[Guest 1]: But I'll be.
[Guest 1]: Looking forward to meeting the people of immemorial susceptibility.
[Guest 1]: Let's like.
[Guest 1]: Because investing in people.
[Guest 1]: It can't be a bigger investment in the world.
[Guest 1]: Which you.
[Guest 1]: I am telling you.
[Guest 1]: Everything you are telling about Sundar Lele.
[Guest 1]: I was thinking that people.
[Guest 1]: What kind of thing.
[Guest 1]: And I in fact.
[Guest 1]: Sometimes.
[Guest 1]: What I was scared.
[Guest 1]: I have to keep some nicknacks together.
[Guest 1]: My book's copy.
[Guest 1]: Copy a little ego was achieved.
[Guest 1]: So I said no, let's stop it.
[Guest 1]: But just doing that paying that compliment.
[Guest 1]: The members of the purse.
[Guest 1]: At our hotel reception in Doha.
[Guest 1]: I just went the first day, I said, why don't you come and see our play?
[Guest 1]: Oh, you're doing play?
[Guest 1]: I said, yeah.
[Guest 1]: Oh, I would like to come, but what about tickets and what have you said?
[Guest 1]: We said, yeah, there are always some seats.
[Guest 1]: We'll get it organized.
[Guest 1]: So the guy came, and he waited after the play.
[Guest 1]: And I swear, I had tears in my eyes because when I came out, this boy, the way he hugged
[Guest 1]: us, everyone, oh, my God, you're all our stars.
[Guest 1]: Then he told his own story, told his own song.
[Guest 1]: Now a friend has become Doha, who used to provide me almond milk in the morning for breakfast
[Guest 2]: without asking me.
[Guest 2]: That reminds me that Sunandan used to always from the first tour said that Vikram, you
[Guest 2]: have to understand your Indian team is young boys from all over the country.
[Guest 2]: And the one thing that they miss on a tour is food.
[Guest 2]: And Sunandan is a good cook.
[Guest 2]: Do not believe I have had hundreds of times when Dhoni and Irfan and Sachin and all these
[Guest 2]: guys coming to our room, they're sitting on the ground, Lele is cooking veg biryani and
[Guest 2]: giving it to them.
[Guest 2]: And Dhoni is taking the utensils and washing it.
[Guest 2]: After that, he said, Mr. Lele, you have to make this biryani on every tour.
[Guest 2]: And it's such an important thing.
[Guest 2]: You're playing in South Africa two to two months, you don't get the food that you want.
[Guest 2]: They're coming from Jharkhand.
[Guest 2]: They're coming from various parts of the country.
[Guest 2]: Sunandan is a regular cook, journalism later, he said, first feed the kids, then we'll make
[Guest 2]: 100.
[Guest 2]: So these are small things, right?
[Guest 1]: In events.
[Guest 1]: And it just changed the game.
[Guest 1]: One of the early things and events that somebody told me, I remember, actually, you've done
[Guest 1]: a show with them also, I remember.
[Guest 1]: So with Kodak, this guy Richard Fleming used to be there.
[Guest 1]: And he had turned and so he used to go on when we used to go and recce a venue, he used
[Guest 1]: to first go and look at the bedroom, what is the bed of the room?
[Guest 1]: Then he would go and say, what food will you serve them?
[Guest 1]: Don't serve me a special meal.
[Guest 1]: What's your regular meal?
[Guest 1]: And if he could, he would try and go without actually telling them he's coming.
[Guest 1]: But he said, these are the two things that matter when you're out of your house.
[Guest 1]: Ultimately, in which bed do you sleep, what do you eat?
[Guest 1]: He says, the event is for two hours, four hours, you can make a spectacle out of it.
[Guest 1]: 20 dancing people will come, there will be lights, there will be sound, there will be
[Guest 1]: motivational speaker.
[Guest 1]: Ultimately, that guy will go to that bed to sleep.
[Guest 1]: And that meal that he will eat.
[Guest 1]: And I have seen that change relationships and like when Amit is there, Amit is with
[Guest 1]: the people till 4am because he's with them.
[Guest 1]: Drinking, eating, laughing, knowing their families, knowing them by first names.
[Guest 1]: I always say that, that investment that you can make in people and when people ask me
[Guest 1]: saying how do you become a good anchor or a good whatever, I say, be interested or be
[Guest 1]: interesting.
[Guest 1]: If you are interested in the other person, that's enough.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I know Sulandan a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: I've, you know, traveled with him when I was sort of touring and in the cricket scene.
[Guest 2]: The Pakistan tour especially.
[Amit Varma]: The Pakistan tour especially.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember him as this lovely, warm person.
[Amit Varma]: But that's who he is.
[Amit Varma]: He's a warm, gentle person.
[Amit Varma]: So everything that he tells you about the importance of meeting people, making them
[Amit Varma]: happy is, I would imagine it comes naturally to him.
[Amit Varma]: And it is not as if, you know, if he has put intentionality, then he has put post-facto.
[Amit Varma]: To me, it seems like that's the kind of person he is.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm wondering what is the feedback loop between those two?
[Amit Varma]: Because if you are, for example, intentional about something and you do it all the time,
[Amit Varma]: at some point it becomes a part of you.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so Roshan, when you talk about, for example, investing in people, is it that
[Amit Varma]: you've always been a warm person who's looking out for others?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it that at some point you realized that this is a good thing to do?
[Amit Varma]: It works for me.
[Amit Varma]: It works for them.
[Amit Varma]: It works for everyone.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to do more of this.
[Guest 2]: And then it becomes natural to you.
[Amit Varma]: Can I answer this for Roshan?
[Unknown]: Sure.
[Unknown]: I think he's going to say something like, I met him earlier and he was very rude.
[Guest 2]: I think Roshan is hugely structured.
[Guest 2]: So if he sees, so there are two aspects to it.
[Guest 2]: He's a warm person and therefore he's inclined to do this.
[Guest 2]: But the moment he realizes the value of it, he will routinize it.
[Guest 2]: Because he is an entrepreneur at heart with a creative, three organs creative, two organs
[Guest 2]: in other things.
[Guest 2]: One organ continuously looking for return on investment.
[Guest 2]: So he's actually left, right, middle brain, sub-combination.
[Amit Varma]: How many organs are there?
[Unknown]: I'm trying to identify.
[Amit Varma]: Multi-organ.
[Guest 2]: Multi-organ.
[Guest 2]: So basically, every time you have to understand, and this is Roshan's plus and it's his minus,
[Guest 2]: is because the moment you become an entrepreneur, and I've seen this in many YPO events that
[Guest 2]: I perform at, where there are millionaires and trillionaires, see your lens becomes entrepreneurial.
[Guest 2]: And that sometimes is good, that sometimes is bad, because you are looking at return
[Guest 2]: on investment on everything.
[Guest 2]: And you have to be wired like that to become a good entrepreneur.
[Guest 2]: So the moment the entrepreneur realizes that this is a place of value, his checklist will
[Guest 2]: have that.
[Guest 2]: And which is a good thing.
[Guest 2]: I'm not saying that.
[Guest 2]: So it is now second nature to invest in people.
[Guest 2]: Now it starts with warmth, but anything that you want to excel in has to be routinized.
[Guest 2]: And that's what atomic habits is all about, for that matter.
[Guest 2]: That is what sport teaches you.
[Guest 2]: It's about doing the same things again and again.
[Guest 2]: And that's why if you see Dhoni coming and taking strike, he will, you know, wipe his
[Guest 2]: brow first, then he'll do this and that, because to come to a point of extreme concentration
[Guest 2]: and effectiveness, a routine is what takes you to that point.
[Guest 2]: So many people, you know, ask me, when you're imitating Sachin Tendulkar, why are you doing
[Guest 2]: that?
[Guest 2]: I have had a conversation with Sachin and said that if I don't make my cup of tea in
[Guest 2]: the morning, till the point of time I'm taking strike, everything is the same, because that
[Guest 2]: brings me to that state of consciousness where I'm facing somebody at 140 and trying to see
[Guest 2]: whether the ball is reversing or going the other way.
[Guest 2]: So that routine is what defines excellence.
[Guest 2]: And I think with Roshan, I've seen that, that when he knows that, boss, I'm going to be
[Guest 2]: useful in business, I'm going to be useful in personal relationships, I'll routinize
[Guest 2]: it.
[Guest 2]: And that's why it's become second nature to him.
[Guest 2]: With Sunandan also, I have seen that he will not go to anybody's house without taking
[Guest 2]: that small thing.
[Guest 2]: And if you've said in one of the conversations that I have that saffron biryani, that's it,
[Guest 2]: it's in his database.
[Guest 2]: Now, if he goes to Iran, then Amit, I've brought your saffron.
[Guest 2]: Now, the thing is, that's coming naturally to him now, but he realizes the significance
[Guest 1]: of making other people happy.
[Guest 1]: I'll add to that a little or whatever.
[Guest 1]: So this, this being warm, etc. was a very Lucknow thing.
[Guest 1]: My mother had this line which we used to always call her Kalyari Devi, because taking care
[Guest 1]: of the whole neighborhood, right, from the maid to that person, the ironing woman, the
[Guest 1]: sweeper.
[Guest 1]: This is her problem.
[Guest 1]: Even today, my mother, now we have a, after years, we have a live-in, you know, a help
[Guest 1]: with a husband who drinks, he's nice at heart, but sometimes he drinks, whatever, that's
[Guest 1]: the thing.
[Guest 1]: But his two children, like they are my mother's project right now.
[Guest 1]: Covering their books and all that is their project.
[Guest 1]: Now, the children said to him, they came home and they said, Nani, you come to our science
[Guest 1]: fair.
[Guest 1]: You know, my father, who doesn't step out, went with such pride.
[Guest 1]: And I said that look at what it does, it gives them a reason to be, because we all need finally
[Guest 1]: that reason to be.
[Guest 1]: For me, I'll tell you, and I'm telling you, I have this with me.
[Guest 1]: Just to his saffron biryani story, I'll tell you, I love, I'm curious, I love discovering
[Guest 1]: things.
[Guest 1]: One day I discovered a place where, when somebody told me that the place called Love Fools that
[Guest 1]: does this incredible sit-down dinners in Bandra, I went there for the first time, to test it
[Guest 1]: myself, because I won't introduce my friend that I've tested, you know, properly there.
[Guest 1]: Beautiful, lovely meal and whatever, loved it and stuff.
[Guest 1]: Talked to Sarita Pereira, who was the chef, asked her life story.
[Guest 1]: Now, nobody, people just appreciate the food.
[Guest 1]: I sat with her for half an hour and I asked her, where did you come from?
[Guest 1]: I was in Spain, I learnt here, I did this, da-da-da-da-da, whatever.
[Guest 1]: I went to Turkey.
[Guest 1]: I'm going to Turkey through the market and suddenly I remember that she had mentioned
[Guest 1]: to me that many of the spices I used to use in my food, I can't find.
[Guest 1]: And I just messaged her saying, Sarita, I'm in Turkey, I'm in the spices market, I was
[Guest 1]: thinking of you, anything I can get for you.
[Guest 1]: What when I was in Doha, the message I sent, I just sent you that, nothing.
[Guest 1]: I just suddenly said, Amit, are you fond of football, whatever, whatever, so it's that
[Guest 1]: thing.
[Guest 1]: And in that, there's no, it wasn't a matter of profit.
[Guest 1]: She said, I can get a pepper called Urf Biber, but I can't find it.
[Guest 1]: I went, I took a box with me, when did you get Urf Biber?
[Guest 1]: Love Fools is now one of the best known private dining experiences in Bombay.
[Guest 1]: There are days you can't get a seat or whatever.
[Guest 1]: I can get anything, anytime.
[Guest 1]: But because, and but it's not just that.
[Guest 1]: I will continue the relationship.
[Guest 1]: Sarita will call me, I'm thinking of opening a speakeasy on top, we'll commune, come and
[Guest 1]: do something.
[Guest 1]: You know, this, you have to participate without this thing of, will I fit Papplu in this?
[Guest 2]: One, which is a big problem.
[Guest 2]: And I feel that this is not a problem, and this has to be reconciled.
[Guest 2]: Fitting Papplu is not a problem, because if, and I'm struggling because I haven't done
[Guest 2]: 99% of the things, because in my lens, I have a lens from Pune, that it's wrong to ask someone
[Guest 2]: for work.
[Guest 2]: Now, if you are born from this lens, so then what happens is that, oh man, the whole world
[Guest 2]: has gone because of merchants.
[Guest 2]: We have to fit Papplu and bring Columbus there, otherwise why would he have to go there?
[Guest 2]: But we have to accept that as long as we are seeing win-win, as they say in Sapolsky's
[Guest 2]: book, this research shows that when two people win, the dopamine production is also high.
[Guest 2]: The double thank you moment.
[Guest 2]: Effectively.
[Guest 2]: So this means that somewhere we have to accept that if we make friends in trade, it's fine.
[Guest 2]: There is nothing wrong in this.
[Guest 2]: You are making friends, not enemies.
[Guest 2]: So I think fitting Papplu has to be acceptable now in order to create.
[Amit Varma]: I think what Roshan means, and I really agree with that, and I think there is something
[Amit Varma]: to that, is that at one level you can be instrumental and you can say that I will buy this spice
[Amit Varma]: so I can get a reservation when I want.
[Amit Varma]: At one level, you can think like that.
[Amit Varma]: But if you make it a part of the rules by which you live your life, a normative part
[Amit Varma]: of you, that whenever I can, I will give a friend what she wants.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that that leads to Papplu's fitting in unusual ways, which you could not have
[Guest 2]: imagined.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: But I am reconciling.
[Guest 2]: I want to come to a point where it's okay to say that, boss, if I give him saffron,
[Guest 2]: then he will give it to me.
[Guest 1]: But it is not you.
[Unknown]: And don't become that.
[Unknown]: I'll tell you one more thing.
[Unknown]: I'm not becoming that.
[Guest 2]: I will never become that.
[Guest 2]: That's what I'm saying.
[Guest 2]: Don't get…
[Guest 2]: But it's okay if you do it.
[Guest 1]: This is your YPO, EO corruption, which I'm very worried about.
[Guest 1]: Kindly explain.
[Unknown]: No, no, no.
[Unknown]: I'll tell you.
[Guest 1]: See, YPO and EO events that happen in India, which is these, you have to be a hundred crore
[Guest 1]: plus or whatever, etc. to be part of one of these organizations.
[Guest 1]: Vikram has told me a beautiful story.
[Guest 1]: Actually, I think you should tell me about the negotiation story first.
[Guest 2]: Then I will build on that.
[Guest 1]: That's against.
[Unknown]: Our lens will never understand this.
[Guest 2]: So I was being called by these YPO, whatever that agency, and every now and then, you know,
[Guest 2]: Bombay YPO, they're the trillionaire economy, they're giving you an opportunity to perform
[Guest 2]: in front of the…
[Guest 2]: I said, boss, I am a middle class Maharashtan.
[Unknown]: I don't need opportunity.
[Guest 2]: I cannot do and be happy.
[Guest 2]: So don't say that.
[Guest 2]: If you want a discount, I will give you the discount.
[Guest 2]: It's not that I don't want to do that event.
[Guest 2]: I want to.
[Guest 2]: And no corporate negotiates that much.
[Guest 2]: They will tell you if they want you, they'll give you the money and blah, blah, blah.
[Guest 2]: But they were at it, at it, at it, at it.
[Guest 2]: Finally, I told the lady there, I said that I want to do this event free of cost.
[Guest 2]: No, no, sir, what are you, why are you saying that?
[Guest 2]: I want to do it free of cost only so that I can tell my grandmom that I work for the
[Guest 2]: trillionaire people for free.
[Guest 2]: I have done a favor to them that you will also be happy that there are so many big people
[Guest 2]: and I told them that you don't have money, so I will do it for free.
[Amit Varma]: Buy something nice.
[Guest 2]: Okay, I will do it.
[Guest 2]: You are poor people, so I will do it for free.
[Guest 2]: So no, no, no, sir, what are you saying, sir, no, no, we will give you whatever.
[Guest 2]: And the fee was agreed.
[Guest 2]: I did the show, Touchwood, it was super successful.
[Guest 2]: It was a great show.
[Guest 2]: Everybody who was anybody and stuff like that came and said, what a fabulous performance,
[Guest 2]: blah, blah, blah.
[Guest 2]: I got drunk along with three or four people who were probably one lakh crore each.
[Guest 2]: I can't name them.
[Guest 2]: I can, but I won't.
[Guest 1]: But they were there.
[Unknown]: And then one of the guys who was the organizers, I said, sir, why do you negotiate so much?
[Guest 2]: Like, why did you bother me so much?
[Guest 2]: So he said, son, should I tell you something?
[Guest 2]: So I said, yes, tell me.
[Guest 2]: He was also drunk, victory, I didn't understand, what is victory?
[Guest 2]: He said, why are these people so big here, because they win, they win in every negotiation.
[Guest 2]: Whether the negotiation is yours or a thousand crores, who wins, I win and it dawned to me
[Guest 2]: that at one level, maybe he's right in the way, but for me, who comes from an art, culture,
[Guest 2]: giving, charity, Gokhale, Agarkar, that kind of a background, I'm thinking, what a waste
[Guest 2]: of life.
[Unknown]: Who wants to win in a relationship, who wants to win in negotiating with an artist.
[Guest 2]: But then I realized what an, I mean, I'm not saying all entrepreneurs, and it affected
[Guest 2]: me for seven days.
[Guest 2]: I said, he wanted to win with me, but then he explained to me, and then it explains the
[Guest 2]: psychology that when you are negotiating two rupees with rickshaw wala, bhaji wale bechari
[Guest 2]: itna kaam kare, de dena usko 10 rupee extra, kya farag padta hai.
[Guest 2]: But that gets ingrained, which is good for entrepreneurship, but when it goes into normal
[Guest 2]: human relation, it becomes so bad.
[Guest 2]: And still from that part, then you know that that answered my, that thing na, ki itna 200
[Guest 2]: crore tere paas tu holiday kyu nahi jata hai, it's because the psychology is not about making
[Guest 2]: money to enjoy.
[Guest 2]: It's about making money, because I want to show the other guy that ki main jeeta.
[Guest 1]: No, no, and see, which is what I'm saying that the curse that I'm saying that he, thankfully
[Guest 1]: he's not affected by it.
[Guest 1]: He thinks he is at some point, but it is the thing of, you know, to build contacts because
[Guest 2]: it will get you ex, blah, blah, blah, it's not him.
[Guest 1]: And I'll tell you, and this thing, no, I'll tell you, this thing about paplu fit karna,
[Guest 1]: I have witnessed something, I used to do an interview based show with film stars at one
[Guest 1]: point in time.
[Guest 1]: And one day we were doing an interview.
[Guest 1]: And in that interview, another film star came, looked at this big vehicle, you know, Land
[Guest 1]: Cruiser or whatever in those days, early, I'm talking late 90s.
[Guest 1]: And the other actor looked at this guy and said, yeah, I love this vehicle you've got
[Guest 1]: and whatever.
[Guest 1]: How did you get it?
[Guest 1]: He said, don't worry, I've got a great guy, he'll get it for you.
[Guest 1]: And when I was watching this, I said, yaar kya camaraderie hai, you know, between the
[Guest 1]: two actors.
[Guest 1]: And he said, I'm giving you this guy's number, you call him after half an hour.
[Guest 1]: The other actor went off.
[Guest 1]: This actor who owned the vehicle, called that guy and said, sunn, main tere ke liye so and
[Guest 1]: so bhej raha hoon, mera 10% rakh liye na.
[Guest 1]: Wow.
[Guest 1]: You know, mere saamne se saara veneer hat gaya, dosti, ye bandhan toh pyaar ka bandhan
[Guest 1]: hai.
[Guest 1]: And I said, okay.
[Guest 1]: But I will never do that.
[Guest 1]: And I cannot do that because I don't want to be remembered like that.
[Guest 1]: I do not want to be known that I made a percentage in this deal.
[Guest 1]: I'll tell you what the beauty is, and it is very difficult for people to understand.
[Guest 1]: I have at least three people who give me equity in their company without me putting a rupee,
[Guest 1]: without me asking once because they said, we're so, humaise samajh mein nahi aata, huma
[Guest 1]: ko kaise payback karein?
[Guest 1]: Aap humko advise karte hoon, aap humko contract padhte hoon, aap humko business dete hoon,
[Guest 1]: aap karte hoon, aap kuchh maangte hi nahi hoon.
[Guest 1]: So, please, we're giving you this 5% in the company.
[Guest 1]: 5% in a company which is going to grow and I know it'll grow into something big.
[Guest 1]: And I was like, listen, I don't need this.
[Guest 1]: No, no, no.
[Guest 1]: No, if you don't need it.
[Unknown]: You don't need it.
[Unknown]: But 2.5% for Sathegu and 2.5% for me, sir.
[Unknown]: But that.
[Unknown]: If you have a problem like this, we'll help you.
[Guest 1]: That's why I befriended you.
[Guest 1]: But I'm saying the same thing.
[Guest 1]: But that is the, to me, that is the true joy.
[Unknown]: That is the real joy.
[Unknown]: And it's the same thing.
[Guest 1]: Now, to bring what he said, also think that, oh, you know, I look for routine and I put
[Guest 1]: it into my structure.
[Guest 1]: I actually, as I'm saying, I'm an anomaly in these terms.
[Guest 1]: I did the musical.
[Guest 1]: I discovered that India doesn't have a musical company culture.
[Guest 1]: So in America, there is a company theater thing where there'll be a company and the company
[Guest 1]: will be paid for and they're rehearsing every day, which is why they can put up a musical
[Guest 1]: every year.
[Guest 1]: In India, we recruit what we call triple threats.
[Guest 1]: Triple threats are, you can act, sing and dance.
[Guest 1]: So that's a triple threat as a performer, right?
[Guest 1]: And a triple threat performer is very rare to find.
[Guest 1]: In Disney in the West, how do you get all these big actors?
[Guest 1]: Because they start from summer camps.
[Guest 1]: Now, for me, there's a problem to solve.
[Guest 1]: If you want, there are eight big musicals happening in India.
[Guest 1]: Believe you me, six of them are going to be disasters.
[Guest 1]: Because you are trying to hum Bollywood film musical, but, you know, are you training the
[Guest 1]: actors?
[Guest 1]: Are you training that base talent?
[Guest 1]: You will get by because you will pre-record the songs and therefore they'll lip sync.
[Guest 1]: Then it's not a true musical, right?
[Guest 1]: You will do it because you got pre-recorded music and not live musicians, then it is not
[Guest 1]: a musical.
[Guest 1]: So to preserve that form, you need to develop this.
[Guest 1]: Now I found a creative problem to solve.
[Guest 1]: How do you set up a musical theatre company?
[Guest 1]: So I went to my community, I said, guys, I think we should, we do, we do workshops and
[Guest 1]: this, this and this.
[Guest 1]: Why can't we do this?
[Guest 1]: Now I will solve that.
[Guest 1]: This is saying trying to find a problem, trying to find a business solution for it and see
[Guest 1]: if it is implemented.
[Guest 1]: If it happens only once, it was a creative act of passion.
[Guest 1]: If it is finds repeat business, it's a business, right?
[Guest 1]: If it can be repeated, that's one part.
[Guest 1]: But jumping in and doing crazy things like going and doing this play or suddenly going
[Guest 1]: and doing a writing work, I mean, when I did the writing workshop with you, it was what?
[Guest 1]: I have never done it.
[Guest 1]: Let's do it once and see what happens.
[Guest 1]: I attended Satyanshu's lectures on filmmaking because I really thought his, and today Satyanshu
[Guest 1]: is a friend, we are working on something together.
[Guest 1]: That was not the intention from day one.
[Guest 1]: The intention was to learn.
[Guest 1]: The intention was to do something crazy and new.
[Guest 1]: Satyanshu does the same, but he does it in a pace of doing that now comedy is happening.
[Guest 1]: It is happening.
[Guest 1]: But it reached a point where I'm telling you, he got, I told him this when he got pissed
[Guest 1]: off because everybody would call him a comic, but his logic was, boss, that's a lot of intelligence
[Guest 1]: and really there is.
[Guest 1]: Some of his observations in shows, my God, that's a life truth.
[Guest 1]: It's not comedy.
[Guest 1]: Zakir today with Tathastu, everybody is going nuts.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, it's life truths, which is just captured in a format.
[Guest 1]: So Satya said, no, to prove that I am much more, I must write a book also, I must do
[Guest 1]: this.
[Guest 1]: You know, I have to tick off all the intellectual hallmarks, I have written a book, I am a motivational
[Guest 1]: speaker.
[Guest 1]: He does all of those things because he has the ability to, but he is a reticent, in 20
[Guest 2]: years, in 10 years, he will do one thing.
[Guest 2]: No, but that is the truth because the man who was not intellectual in his system and
[Guest 2]: did not do the engineering and did not do the IIT and did not do the study abroad kind
[Guest 2]: of a thing.
[Guest 2]: There has been, again, from the background, you know, I could have been a classical singer,
[Guest 2]: I could have been a good cricketer.
[Guest 2]: So in my mind, boss, I have a brain, so to satisfy my inner self, I have to become intellectual.
[Guest 2]: Whether it happens or not, I don't know.
[Guest 2]: That's why I never, stand up comedian, we didn't know anything about that.
[Guest 2]: And coming back to the chronology, I'll come to the point where I, somebody told me stand
[Guest 2]: up comedy.
[Guest 2]: There was no stand up comedy.
[Guest 2]: 2002, if you remember, Amit, at that point of 98 to 2002, there was Cyrus Brocha, because
[Guest 2]: we recruited the VJs at that point of time, I joined MTV by then.
[Unknown]: Shekhar Suman, who was Shekhar?
[Amit Varma]: That was still later, right?
[Guest 2]: That was around that time.
[Guest 2]: I traveled with them.
[Guest 2]: So English stand up comedy was not there at that time.
[Guest 2]: But the one great value that MTV added, and I think that changed my life.
[Guest 2]: And many people don't know, and probably Roshan would know a little bit, that I was actually
[Guest 2]: a socially anxious person, I had major social anxiety.
[Guest 2]: And many people think, you're a comedian, how can you be like this?
[Guest 2]: People don't realize that you might be a cricketer who scores in front of 80,000 people.
[Guest 2]: But in a small social setup, you can be extremely anxious.
[Guest 2]: Because you can't make personal one on one conversations and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: And it was because of certain incidents of you know, rejection that happened to you in
[Guest 2]: school college.
[Guest 2]: Again, I don't remember when and how, but it was there for sure.
[Guest 2]: And that kind of changed in MTV.
[Guest 2]: Because MTV was an environment where I had left Pune, and I had come to this place where
[Guest 2]: and that was the first phase of MTV, right?
[Guest 2]: Everybody suddenly had become creative.
[Guest 2]: Everybody was acknowledging that bad jokes are good.
[Guest 2]: And that bad jokes culture kind of opened my mind and said, here bad jokes are appreciated.
[Guest 2]: And as Woody Allen would say that there are 100 bad jokes, and there is one good joke.
[Guest 2]: And that one good joke goes into the library to make a stand up comedy act six months later.
[Guest 2]: So it's a compilation of 100 good jokes, which come after 10,000 bad jokes.
[Guest 2]: But that bad joke culture in MTV kind of opened my mind and I got appreciated for doing these
[Guest 2]: one liners and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: Then one fine evening, a common friend Gigi George saw me imitating Sachin Tendulkar.
[Guest 2]: And he said, What are you doing here, you should be a VJ.
[Guest 2]: And then there was a VJ hunt next week.
[Guest 2]: And Brocha called me on stage and I did a five minute act.
[Guest 2]: And somebody told me it was a stand up comedy.
[Guest 2]: And I said, What is this?
[Guest 2]: Because there was no Google and whatever, the only people we idolized was...
[Amit Varma]: This would have been 98 if I remember.
[Amit Varma]: 98.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: 98, 99.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, must be.
[Guest 2]: I remember that.
[Guest 2]: So it so happened that then I found out, you know, called for some books, Jerry Seinfeld,
[Guest 2]: I think Seinfeld last season was happening at that point of time, somebody sent me some
[Guest 2]: clips.
[Guest 2]: So I started watching that.
[Guest 2]: And that's when I realized that there is some game in these imitations that I'm doing.
[Guest 2]: And this Sachin imitation just resonated.
[Guest 2]: And Sharjah just happened, right?
[Guest 2]: So that Tony Gregg, Sachin Tendulkar imitation, which I used to do, post the 1998 Sharjah
[Guest 2]: tour, everybody started liking it.
[Guest 2]: And I was like, yeah, that was the seed when, you know, I realized that this can be done.
[Guest 2]: But the MTV environment and all allowed me to do these experiments on stage.
[Guest 2]: And you know that imitation, right?
[Guest 1]: Please, can we have it?
[Guest 2]: My theory at that time was Sharath Pawar had paid off Tony Gregg and told him the more
[Guest 2]: you praise Tendulkar, I'll increase your salary.
[Guest 2]: It was his economic model.
[Guest 2]: So Tony Gregg went completely mad.
[Unknown]: Well, it's all happening here.
[Unknown]: Sachin Tendulkar's on fire, smash them all over the place.
[Unknown]: What applies to the airs, got it, Balancher 6, all those people are watching the telecast
[Unknown]: live on.
[Unknown]: I'm sure Dishon will be dancing in their lounges because Tendulkar's on fire, smash your strides
[Unknown]: all over the place.
[Unknown]: What a play.
[Guest 2]: What a wonderful, wonderful play.
[Guest 2]: Cut to the presentation.
[Unknown]: Sachin Tendulkar, the play comfort level is of vital importance.
[Unknown]: These one day matches, I think you played some quality cricket out there.
[Unknown]: Yeah, I thought most definitely I thought the wicket was great.
[Unknown]: At the end of the day, what matters is that we play well as a team.
[Unknown]: And I thought we played better cricket than them.
[Unknown]: In one match, he said definitely the wicket was great.
[Unknown]: Second match, he said most definitely the wicket was great.
[Guest 2]: Third match, he said almost definitely the wicket was great.
[Guest 2]: And this imitation just, and there was no virality at that time, but word of mouth was
[Guest 1]: there.
[Guest 1]: Got to us.
[Guest 2]: So we were organizing.
[Guest 2]: So this happened and I started getting on stage on many of the MTV shows and we used
[Guest 2]: to have this get together where Sunil Lullah, the MD at that point of time, saw me perform
[Guest 2]: on stage doing this 5-10 minute act as to imitate around 8-10 cricketers.
[Guest 2]: And then Ashish, my friend, said that there is a show called Diamond Merchant.
[Guest 2]: There was no stand-up comedy, right?
[Guest 2]: So you were, what were you called?
[Guest 2]: And you guys also did that for around 7-8 years.
[Guest 2]: You are filler.
[Unknown]: So our name for our profession was filler.
[Guest 2]: So will you become a filler?
[Guest 2]: I said, wherever you fill it, we will fill it.
[Unknown]: We were getting paid.
[Guest 2]: It was the first show, so we were not getting paid, but still we said we will pay a little.
[Guest 2]: So I go to this Pancharatna building in South Mumbai, where the diamond, this thing is there.
[Guest 2]: And I enter this Diamond Merchant is sitting, and there's three levels of security, I go
[Guest 2]: there.
[Guest 2]: What do you do?
[Guest 2]: Filler, I said, you called me for filler, so I will fill it, what else should I say?
[Guest 2]: So do it.
[Guest 2]: So I did this imitation, and that's when I got my first show.
[Guest 2]: He said, only a week later, I realized that this was a big show of the diamond industry
[Guest 2]: along with the Oppenheimers of South Africa.
[Guest 2]: And they were playing a cricket match, and there was Daler Mehndi, and I was a filler.
[Guest 2]: That day, I realized that boss, if 200 diamond merchants are laughing for 10 to 12 minutes
[Guest 2]: as a filler, there is something there.
[Guest 2]: And in that MTV time, in that marketing, wherever I got this opportunity, I played Sidhu along
[Guest 2]: with Cyrus Saukar in that show called MTV Fully Faltu, which did you write that show?
[Guest 2]: I don't think I wrote that because I don't remember it, but my memory is a bit like yours.
[Guest 2]: So I think Mrityunjay wrote that, before that, you did a couple of shows.
[Guest 2]: And then that's when I realized that boss, there is something here.
[Guest 2]: Something is going right here.
[Guest 2]: And then the big break happened.
[Guest 2]: And that was the time I had left MTV and joined the movie industry.
[Guest 2]: The promoters of Sony had started a company and again, see, my thing was Metallite Productions.
[Guest 2]: So we were, as marketing guys, we were the first to enter the television industry.
[Guest 2]: And I said, before I experiment with these shows and all, let me do Bollywood once.
[Guest 2]: And that was the time promoters of Sony started a film company.
[Guest 2]: And this one and a half years were great lessons in human observations.
[Guest 2]: I learned about the entertainment industry and I'll share some with you.
[Guest 2]: I did marketing for three films, Nagesh Kuknoor's second film after Hyderabad Blues, which was
[Guest 2]: called Teen Diware.
[Guest 2]: There was Madhur Bhandar's second film after Chandni Bar called Satta with Raveena Tandon.
[Guest 2]: And there was a film called Dil Wil Pyaar Pyaar, which was Anant Mahadevan's debut film.
[Guest 2]: This is when I entered the movie industry before we come to that legendary moment that
[Guest 2]: I had with Roshan Abbas, which kind of propelled the standup career.
[Guest 2]: I spent one and a half years and I realized that this is a fascinating place just for
[Guest 2]: people who like to observe other people.
[Guest 2]: And here is where this, you know, small town interfacing with the established community
[Guest 2]: is what I saw in real time.
[Guest 2]: And it was great, right?
[Guest 2]: At that point of time, there was no corporatization.
[Guest 2]: I was the first marketing guy in an unorganized sector.
[Guest 2]: So the old school script writers would come and, you know, show you scripts and stuff
[Guest 2]: like that.
[Guest 2]: And there was this funny incident that happened.
[Guest 2]: A scriptwriter in Warsaw came and said,
[Guest 2]: You are a new guy, I will tell you such a script, sir, you will go crazy.
[Guest 2]: So now, two hours and we were still at the first shot.
[Guest 2]: The man comes in, so what's next?
[Guest 2]: The camera grabs the man.
[Guest 2]: This went for one hour.
[Guest 2]: We were still in the first scene.
[Guest 2]: Then I said, sir, I have to go out a little.
[Guest 2]: She won't understand people like you.
[Guest 2]: So I said, what do I do now?
[Guest 2]: You come later.
[Guest 2]: Sir, let me tell you one thing, once you get this picture, you'll have to take it off.
[Unknown]: I was like, what a life!
[Unknown]: But this is full.
[Unknown]: Oh man, I said, what a world this is.
[Guest 2]: Unbelievable.
[Unknown]: Was it ever made?
[Guest 2]: I don't know, it was never made.
[Guest 2]: So here I have two observations.
[Guest 2]: I got to learn very closely watching a lot of actors.
[Guest 2]: And I am sure Roshan relates to these observations.
[Guest 2]: Because I realized that there is an amazing thing that is happening between the established community.
[Guest 2]: Which is people who don't consider this as a big thing because they are born in families.
[Guest 2]: Who have all the resources and they have set the benchmark of coolness.
[Guest 2]: They will talk Americanism, this is the kind of cinema we watch.
[Guest 2]: Yes, Bollywood wants to make the same movies but they will do all of this.
[Guest 2]: Now this is a benchmark that is set and this is the value of cool that has been attached.
[Guest 2]: Now the small time actors from smaller cities come and interact with them.
[Guest 2]: With a lot of social anxiety.
[Guest 2]: And they realize that their work or their abilities is not what is going to be judged.
[Guest 2]: How they behave in this milieu is what they are going to be judged on.
[Guest 2]: And this is where I see a lot of this sad thing happening.
[Guest 2]: Where a Marathi actor has come from say Satara, who is a good actor.
[Guest 2]: Comes and goes into a party where those standard Juhu boys and girls are behaving in a certain way.
[Guest 2]: And the entire next three years this guy is practicing to be that person.
[Guest 2]: So that he feels that they will now accept him and give him that first role.
[Guest 2]: And that one and a half two years is so traumatic because I am seeing the Marathi.
[Guest 2]: Because I am now a guy who is MBA educated, can speak English and I am this.
[Guest 2]: So that my social acceptability is reasonable here.
[Guest 2]: And because I can speak good Marathi, my acceptability with this guy is also good.
[Guest 2]: And I see this guy from somebody who is discussing Pula Deshpande, Gadhi Madgulkar, Kumar Gandharva.
[Guest 2]: To suddenly meeting me in a party one year later.
[Guest 2]: Hey babes, what's up dude?
[Unknown]: And I am like, what has happened to this person?
[Guest 2]: And then I realized that this man is finished from inside.
[Guest 2]: Because his entire focus has gone that how can this director who lives in Juhu accept me?
[Guest 2]: And he goes inside that party, those people are making fun of him.
[Guest 2]: And then I realized that if there was an organization which just makes these two ends meet properly, talent will be discovered.
[Guest 2]: But trust me, nine out of ten talents that I met during that time was struggling to just fit in.
[Guest 2]: Because they wanted to say dude and babes, rather than practice their craft.
[Guest 2]: And unfortunately, that is the part I saw and I realized that this the Haryana factor that you are talking about.
[Guest 2]: That time 20 years back I thought that I wish there were stars in their own domain.
[Guest 2]: And they didn't have to suffer this.
[Guest 2]: That was one thing I learned which I saw very closely.
[Guest 2]: The second thing was the dynamics of actors coming late.
[Guest 2]: Or behaving in a particular manner.
[Unknown]: And I used to say that dude, what is the problem of coming on time?
[Guest 2]: And then there was this celebration culture.
[Guest 2]: That sir, this actor comes at least 6 hours late.
[Guest 2]: And he is a big actor.
[Guest 2]: And this was getting celebrated.
[Guest 2]: And I said, what is this psychology of people celebrating bad behavior?
[Guest 2]: And then one actress, she started to behave very badly on the set.
[Guest 2]: So I went to her and I said that ma'am, I mean, everybody is normal.
[Guest 2]: If you have any issues, just let me know. I'll sort it out.
[Guest 2]: And I was trying to be structured.
[Guest 2]: Because that's the only thing I knew coming from a corporate background.
[Guest 2]: And if you were structured, you were considered uncool.
[Guest 2]: But I told her that this is what.
[Guest 2]: And one day she got drunk and she called me to the set.
[Guest 2]: And then we went to the vanity van and she told me that.
[Guest 2]: Dude, come here.
[Guest 2]: Let me explain to you what industry is.
[Guest 2]: And I said, yes, ma'am, explain.
[Guest 2]: Did you find anything lacking on the set?
[Guest 2]: She said, if I behave well, you all will take me for granted.
[Guest 2]: So I make sure that every day of my film, first day, I break a glass.
[Guest 2]: I do something so that I start getting respect.
[Guest 2]: If I don't do that, even the spot boy won't give me tea.
[Guest 2]: When I do the first day, then I will get respect in the industry.
[Guest 2]: And I was like, what kind of behavior is this?
[Guest 2]: But then I realized that all this creative ecosystem here.
[Guest 2]: Was about getting attention to yourself.
[Guest 2]: And therefore it was important to behave badly.
[Guest 2]: And that became culture.
[Guest 2]: So if an actor came on time, he was considered an idiot.
[Guest 2]: So he came three hours late.
[Guest 2]: So that there was this danger and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: And this human behavior was great to watch.
[Guest 2]: Because this was exactly what is the opposite of what is taught to you in management school.
[Guest 2]: That systems and data and all of that.
[Guest 2]: And then I realized the creative industry is about interplay of all these emotions put together.
[Guest 2]: And to give structure to this emotional ecosystem.
[Guest 2]: Is going to be the biggest challenge for the future.
[Guest 2]: And that point of time there was no corporatization.
[Guest 2]: So these were observations that kind of made me interested in this.
[Guest 2]: And say like how do people behave.
[Guest 2]: And that point of time the magic moment happened.
[Guest 2]: When I got a call from Mr. Roshan Abbas.
[Guest 2]: And said that, he didn't know me at that time.
[Guest 2]: He said, I have heard that you do filler-biller.
[Guest 2]: So can you do it for 12-15 minutes?
[Guest 2]: So I said yes, I can do stuff like that.
[Guest 1]: And this is for the Seat Cricket Awards.
[Guest 1]: This is for the Seat Cricket Awards, which is the biggest property.
[Guest 2]: And this is the property I had worked in professional management through.
[Guest 2]: Where you know how the rating systems is created for cricketers and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: Now there were, Roshan said, there is no English stand-up.
[Guest 2]: He doesn't know what I do.
[Guest 2]: So he says, you come to my house.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: Whatever you are going to do, you have to do it in front of me.
[Guest 2]: I had no benchmark.
[Guest 2]: I said okay, I will dance at his house.
[Guest 2]: What's the big deal in this?
[Guest 2]: At the same time, he said that after doing it in my house,
[Guest 2]: Harsh Goenka, who is the chairman of Seat, his people will also call you.
[Guest 2]: You have to go there too.
[Guest 2]: So imagine a time where the stand-up comedian first goes to the event agency.
[Guest 2]: Roshan Abbas is sitting there with his friend and says, do it.
[Unknown]: Very sure.
[Guest 2]: Very sure.
[Guest 2]: Like, dance.
[Guest 2]: And I did the act.
[Guest 2]: Roshan has no idea about cricket.
[Guest 2]: But Roshan knows that it is working.
[Guest 2]: So he says that I think this is fine.
[Guest 2]: Whatever he is doing.
[Guest 2]: But obviously, because imitations and all is something that he would know.
[Guest 2]: He said that tomorrow you have to go to Mr. Harsh Goenka.
[Guest 2]: Now Mr. Harsh Goenka with six people are sitting in a boardroom.
[Guest 2]: And I suddenly feel I am in MBA entrance exam going for my first job.
[Guest 2]: And they say that, because nobody knows, right?
[Guest 2]: What is a stand-up English comedian going to do?
[Guest 2]: Because what is the line-up for the Seat Awards?
[Guest 2]: Akshay Kumar, Priyanka Chopra, Urmila Matondkar, Mahima Chaudhary.
[Amit Varma]: And to put an item in between.
[Guest 1]: This is 2001, I am guessing.
[Guest 1]: Three.
[Guest 1]: And our line-up was Priyanka Chopra doing her first event.
[Unknown]: First event.
[Guest 1]: There was Gauhar, there was Mandira, there was Priyanka, there was Ramona.
[Unknown]: I forget the main actor.
[Guest 1]: No, no, there was Akshay Kumar.
[Guest 1]: Urmila Matondkar was there.
[Guest 1]: But it was a big line-up.
[Guest 2]: Big line-up.
[Guest 2]: So I go there, I do my 10 minutes.
[Guest 2]: I am still working in MetLight.
[Guest 2]: So I remember the day when this happened.
[Guest 2]: My boss was not letting me go fast.
[Guest 2]: So I said no, I have to go to perform at the Seat Awards.
[Guest 2]: So finally he left me.
[Guest 2]: I came to Taj Crystal where the Seat Awards were there.
[Guest 2]: And I was so badly dressed.
[Guest 2]: Because I was in like corporate apna trouser.
[Guest 2]: And there only I realized everybody is in jacket.
[Guest 2]: That was my first exposure to the fact that this stand-up comedian is like this.
[Guest 2]: I just wore my Jeffrey Boycott cap there.
[Guest 2]: But thankfully Roshan said that we need a little bit of design in your act.
[Guest 2]: Since then they were thinking.
[Guest 2]: So he got me a bar where I could hang my caps.
[Guest 2]: So that every time I do an impersonation, I wear that.
[Unknown]: Change the cap.
[Guest 2]: Wow.
[Guest 2]: And I met Ian Chappell there.
[Guest 2]: And that was my, you know, all these years of cricket.
[Guest 2]: I was very happy to meet Ian Chappell there.
[Guest 2]: And he said, you know, so I got myself introduced.
[Guest 2]: I said I am doing this act and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: And I reached there and I found out that the India and the Australian team are going to be in the audience.
[Guest 2]: Which I was not told.
[Guest 2]: I thought there would be ex-cricketers and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: But these two and the God himself.
[Guest 2]: I mean people who we have idolized got exasperated bowling to him and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: And they are all sitting there.
[Guest 2]: And I am Jamureh Natch.
[Guest 2]: That 15 minutes changed my life.
[Guest 2]: Because when you see a Sunil Gavaskar, Bishan Bedi and Ricky Ponting laughing.
[Guest 2]: And you've been propelled into a world which was actually your world, right?
[Guest 2]: This is all the precursor to that world that you wanted to be part of.
[Guest 2]: Not only as a player but as somebody who loved the game so much.
[Guest 2]: And that 15 minutes and imitation of Gavaskar's walk.
[Guest 2]: And I came down.
[Guest 2]: Bishan Singh Bedi hugged me.
[Guest 2]: And Chappelli came and told me that, you know, next time in your act I should be there and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: I said, boss.
[Guest 2]: This is what I was born for.
[Guest 2]: This is my domain.
[Guest 2]: I didn't interact with Akshay Kumar and Amitabh Bachchan.
[Guest 2]: But for me I was a failed sports person.
[Guest 2]: So I had to live the dream in another way.
[Guest 2]: And that kind of got me thinking.
[Guest 2]: And I think another one month I gave my resignation.
[Guest 2]: But the beauty of that, no YouTube generation, no Google.
[Guest 2]: That actually clip went viral.
[Guest 2]: Because they showed that show some 50 times on Sony.
[Guest 2]: And because of that I started getting calls.
[Guest 2]: Roshan got me a show with Castrol if I am not wrong.
[Guest 2]: Sahara Golf and Castrol became your regular.
[Guest 2]: We were very big in corporate.
[Guest 1]: That was a little later.
[Guest 1]: But it just kept rolling.
[Guest 1]: I remember every 6 months Sathe's rates used to double because he would have done so many shows that his marketing bite would work.
[Guest 1]: He knows that agencies have their own little layer.
[Unknown]: There is so much demand.
[Guest 2]: Boom, boom, boom, boom.
[Guest 2]: At that time I was in 10-12 minutes.
[Guest 2]: I had to take this for 40 minutes.
[Guest 2]: And now I only had cricket stuff.
[Guest 2]: By this time I had increased my reading.
[Guest 2]: I had started writing on observations.
[Guest 2]: Whether those were the standard observations.
[Guest 2]: I had started following what is the concept of the American.
[Guest 2]: I believe that no comedian ever in the history of mankind can touch him.
[Guest 2]: Because there was no standard thing of premise and punchline.
[Guest 2]: This is a very bore concept.
[Guest 2]: Premise and punchline.
[Guest 2]: It is basically very populist way of getting a laughter.
[Guest 2]: Pula Deshpande would talk 2 hours on walking in Vele Parle and he would make you laugh.
[Guest 2]: It was that quality of humor.
[Guest 2]: But then I realized that this is literary humor.
[Guest 2]: Your understanding of life and society should be so high that you pick so many nuances.
[Guest 2]: So then I followed the quintessential American model of that build the story and then the punchline.
[Guest 2]: Build story, get punchline.
[Guest 2]: I started doing that in cricket as well.
[Guest 2]: And while I was doing this writing and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: I realized that my corporate job was now coming to an end.
[Guest 2]: Though I have started enjoying putting a movie project together and seeing it till the end.
[Guest 2]: I said that this looks like a far better in my zone.
[Guest 2]: And then I quit my job.
[Guest 2]: And just before quitting my job I got a call from the Sony network.
[Guest 2]: This was 2003 World Cup.
[Guest 2]: So my last film was still to release.
[Guest 2]: And one of the shows that I had performed in MTV, the Sony chairman was there and Kapil Dev was also there.
[Guest 2]: And these two guys had said that we are launching this kid with extra innings.
[Guest 2]: I always joke in my initial years that nobody noticed me on extra innings because of Mandira Bedi.
[Guest 2]: Even Bishan Singh Bedi didn't get noticed for years after taking 266 wickets.
[Guest 2]: But to me that extra innings moment changed my life.
[Guest 2]: I went to South Africa for the Cricket World Cup 2003.
[Guest 2]: We stayed in Cape Town for two months.
[Guest 2]: I witnessed the Centurion, Big Game, India, Pakistan as a cricket presenter.
[Guest 2]: And the first day, Amit, I land in Cape Town.
[Guest 2]: I don't know what I'm going to do, right?
[Guest 2]: I've been told extra innings, you have to be a filler.
[Guest 2]: And you have to fill in between the broadcast.
[Guest 2]: And as soon as I land, this studio head takes me to a room where I enter and I see the mighty Tony Gregg.
[Guest 2]: Six feet, seven inches, and I'm like, wow, this is something.
[Guest 2]: And it's South Africa 2003, India touted to win the World Cup.
[Guest 2]: The big team, Tendulkar, John Wright saying that, you know, this is the team that will win the World Cup.
[Guest 2]: And I'm sitting there and saying that, boss, I don't know about comedy.
[Guest 2]: But what has got me into cricket is these impersonations.
[Guest 2]: So I have to continue stand-up comedy in the way it is, because that is going to get me to this world, which I've always wanted to be part of.
[Guest 2]: So when, you know, sometimes journalists ask me, what does comedy mean?
[Guest 2]: I'm like, man, this happened.
[Guest 2]: I had to go here.
[Guest 2]: Then it continued because it had a financial model.
[Guest 2]: I continued.
[Guest 2]: And then a few amazing things happened.
[Guest 2]: Tony Gregg called me and said, hi, how are you doing?
[Guest 2]: Good, Tony Gregg.
[Guest 2]: And I imitated him and my first episode was with Tony Gregg himself.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Is it online somewhere?
[Amit Varma]: I think it's online.
[Guest 2]: And we were talking about Inzamam Ullah, who was in prime form during the World Cup.
[Guest 2]: Please, please.
[Guest 2]: So Inzamam, at that time, I always say that whatever may be the question, you had the same answer.
[Guest 2]: It was like Azruddin, right?
[Guest 2]: So Shastri would go, Azruddin, it's a great wicket out here.
[Guest 2]: What did you, what was your strategy?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, the boss played well, right?
[Guest 2]: That's not important.
[Guest 2]: But do you think the Duckworth Lewis will cover?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, the boss played well, right?
[Guest 2]: That's not important.
[Guest 2]: But Azhar Sehwag at five, right?
[Guest 2]: Will you do whatever same?
[Guest 2]: And Inzamam was exactly the same.
[Guest 2]: Inzi, Razak is your key bowler.
[Guest 2]: Thank God, the boys are working hard.
[Guest 2]: The boys didn't get disheartened.
[Guest 2]: But Inzamam Afridi is your key weapon.
[Guest 2]: The boys are working hard.
[Guest 2]: The boys didn't get disheartened.
[Guest 2]: But if you can get Tendulkar out, the boys are working hard.
[Unknown]: So he would not end.
[Guest 2]: And we did an India Park review with Tony Gregg, where I am Inzamam and he is Tony Gregg.
[Amit Varma]: This is a dream come true.
[Unknown]: Is Tony Gregg's imitation of Tony Gregg as good as yours?
[Guest 2]: That was his first reaction as well.
[Guest 2]: That it was great.
[Guest 2]: And then look at the thing, right?
[Guest 2]: Next episode I'm doing with Ian Chappell.
[Guest 2]: After that, I'm doing an episode with Michael Arthurton.
[Guest 2]: Then I'm doing an episode with Nasir Hussain.
[Guest 2]: Then I'm doing an episode with Tiger Pattodi.
[Guest 2]: Then I'm doing an episode with Kapil Dev.
[Guest 2]: This is like a dream come true.
[Guest 2]: And I'm discussing cricket with them.
[Guest 1]: Being paid for it.
[Guest 2]: Paid for it.
[Unknown]: More importantly, I'm not paid too much for that at that point of time.
[Guest 2]: But what worked for me was my knowledge of the game.
[Guest 2]: And that kind of, I could befriend anybody.
[Guest 2]: And I remember having a conversation with Soha Ali Khan years later.
[Guest 2]: And I told her that Tiger Pattodi had become a good friend of mine.
[Guest 2]: And she said, impossible.
[Guest 2]: My dad was a very private person.
[Guest 2]: He would not befriend anybody.
[Guest 2]: And I said, I'm really telling you, I spent the best two months of my life chatting cricket with him.
[Guest 2]: And she said, no, impossible.
[Guest 2]: He will not talk to you.
[Guest 2]: I said, I'll tell you the story.
[Guest 2]: Second day, I'm there and Tiger Pattodi calls me and says that,
[Guest 2]: after I'd done an imitation of Jeffrey Boycott, he said, can you do that again?
[Guest 2]: And I said, I'll tell you Tiger Pattodi, absolute legend of the game.
[Guest 2]: And he started laughing.
[Guest 2]: And from that day onwards, I became his best friend.
[Guest 2]: That same evening, Vikram Sathe, Tiger Pattodi, Kapil Dev having a glass of wine, discussing Tiger's career.
[Guest 2]: Can it be bigger than this for me?
[Guest 2]: Who has not even been close to the world of cricket so far.
[Guest 2]: And now, and joined by Ian Chappell and they're talking about those times and the Ashes and the Kerry Packer.
[Guest 2]: And I was like, boss, pinch me because this is like big stuff.
[Guest 2]: And that when I came back after the Centurion game, I said, that's it, brother.
[Guest 2]: This is what you want to do in your life.
[Guest 2]: Till the time you can extend and do what you can around this world.
[Guest 2]: I think that will be life.
[Guest 2]: And that I came back.
[Guest 2]: I gave my resignation.
[Guest 2]: Thankfully, I was called by the Sri Lanka Cricket Board.
[Guest 2]: Oh, very funny story.
[Guest 2]: 2004 Sri Lanka Cricket Board.
[Guest 2]: I get called to do a stand up in the India versus, sorry, India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
[Guest 2]: For playing that Asia Cup.
[Guest 2]: I was told that except for president, I think Kumar Tunga was the president of Sri Lanka at that time.
[Guest 2]: I said, apart from that, you can imitate anybody in Sri Lanka.
[Guest 2]: And otherwise, we'll throw you back from the airport.
[Guest 2]: So I went for the Asia Cup.
[Guest 2]: I think 2004, 2005.
[Guest 2]: I don't remember.
[Guest 2]: And that's the first time I got friendly with Tendulkar.
[Guest 2]: And I called Sameer Dighe and told him that, you know, I'm doing this act in Sri Lanka.
[Guest 2]: Just tell Sachin.
[Guest 2]: He said, don't need to tell Sachin anything.
[Guest 2]: You go and chat with him before the show and tell him that you know me.
[Guest 2]: Blah, blah.
[Guest 2]: He's anyway seen you at the Seattle Awards a little bit.
[Guest 2]: He'll be fine.
[Guest 2]: I land there and I go to Sachin at the show and say, Sachin, I'm going to imitate a little bit.
[Guest 2]: He said, what are you going to do?
[Guest 2]: I've seen you for five minutes.
[Guest 2]: That's okay.
[Guest 2]: No problem.
[Guest 2]: And I do a 20-minute act there, 20-25 minutes.
[Guest 2]: I mean, to see the Indian team, Pakistani team, Bangladeshi team, Sri Lankan team, sorry,
[Guest 2]: enjoying and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: I said, boss, it's just getting reinforced.
[Guest 2]: And then I am walking outside.
[Guest 2]: I did the Imsamam imitation in front of Imsamam.
[Guest 2]: So I remember walking out of the banquet area and suddenly I bump into Imsamam.
[Guest 2]: And I think it was Yasir Hameed, if I'm not mistaken, the opening batsman of Pakistan.
[Guest 2]: And Imsamam comes and looks at me.
[Guest 2]: It's fun to take off your pants in front of everyone.
[Guest 2]: And I said, what an evening.
[Guest 2]: And next day I was to fly back to India.
[Guest 2]: I was at the breakfast table and Sachin Yuvraj Singh and Harbhajan Singh were sitting out there.
[Guest 2]: And that was my first taste of a cricket story, you know,
[Guest 2]: and that's what I realized that this is what I want to experience all my life.
[Guest 2]: This comedy and all is okay, that will continue.
[Guest 2]: And about the Sri Lanka wicket or something like that,
[Guest 2]: I had this conversation and Sachin gave a five to eight minute explanation on how to play Murali Tharan.
[Guest 2]: Wow.
[Guest 2]: On that table.
[Guest 2]: So I was asking him that, you know, how do you pick it and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: So the moment he realized that this was a relevant question.
[Guest 2]: So I remember Yuvraj Singh saying, this is a cricket story, he will cook it.
[Guest 2]: He said that.
[Guest 2]: But he said something, something.
[Guest 2]: And then Sachin said that, you know, you pick him from the arm, you'll be able to.
[Guest 2]: And I realized that there was some chemistry brewing between somebody who you idolized
[Guest 2]: and kind of became friends with later on.
[Guest 2]: And that's when he knew that this is my kind of a guy and my friendship started with Tendulkar.
[Guest 2]: And in that journey to discover a champion and a whole lot of champions all over,
[Guest 2]: starting to tour with Sunandan, with me.
[Guest 2]: And the big moment was obviously when I was part of the ESPN commentary team in 2006.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, coming back from the 2004 Asia Cup performance,
[Guest 2]: it got reinforced that boss, you're here to stay, it was my gateway to the world of cricket.
[Guest 2]: Comedy was just one way to reach there.
[Unknown]: Cricket was never a way to reach there.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, at least making fun of cricketers and creating jokes around the game
[Guest 2]: kind of made me go closer to the game.
[Guest 2]: And that's when, you know, things started happening, corporate shows started happening
[Guest 2]: and the big break happened, which was 2006 ESPN,
[Guest 2]: when they called me to be part of the commentary box.
[Guest 2]: Now, up until now, you have to understand that Harsha Bhogle is the only external person
[Guest 2]: who's in the commentary box.
[Guest 2]: Gautam Bhimani is doing picture stories, but he's still not in the commentary box.
[Guest 2]: But I have been called to be in the commentary box,
[Guest 2]: obviously with a view of making Test Cricket interesting in terms of, you know,
[Guest 2]: what's happening with the broadcast.
[Guest 2]: So though I was in the comm box for certain periods,
[Guest 2]: I was mainly doing a show called T-Spot,
[Guest 2]: which was in tea at the TA interval break along with Alan Wilkins.
[Guest 2]: But I was in conversation with Waseem Akram during the game in between and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: And Gavaskar and Shastri and Harsha and all of that.
[Guest 2]: That was a big, big break for me because I thought that now they are kind of accepting me
[Guest 2]: as somebody who understands the game beyond the comedy.
[Guest 2]: And this is 2006.
[Guest 2]: So two years of active comedy had already happened.
[Guest 2]: And so looking forward to going to South Africa, three test match series.
[Guest 2]: There was a chance everybody was saying that,
[Guest 2]: hey, there's a good chance that India will beat South Africa in South Africa.
[Guest 2]: So there was this buzz in the commentary box.
[Guest 2]: And it so happened that we reached there.
[Guest 2]: Indian team was in good spirits and we won the first test match.
[Guest 2]: If you remember, that was that big test.
[Guest 2]: And we thought that from there on, things will go good for us, which didn't happen.
[Guest 2]: Now I am there. I'm doing my stuff, slowly getting popularity.
[Guest 2]: Because see, at the end of the day, cricket experts are a lot.
[Guest 2]: But when you add humor to it, suddenly there's this vibe in the box and the broadcast,
[Guest 2]: which everybody is enjoying and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: But one incident happened there that kind of put me off commentary forever.
[Guest 2]: And that was during, I think, the second test match.
[Guest 2]: I don't remember whether it was at Durban or was it the first test match.
[Guest 2]: I think the last day of the first test match, where I was doing a small piece on the ground,
[Guest 2]: near the pitch, which was kind of a humorous take on the first test match.
[Guest 2]: And I was wearing India colors because I'd been told when I was going to South Africa by the Sony team.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I was lucky to go to South Africa because earlier they wanted to shoot everything here.
[Guest 2]: But because there was paucity of time, I finally got to come to South Africa.
[Guest 2]: And I got these clothes from the Nike shop, which was the Indian attire.
[Guest 2]: And by that time, that big deal with Nike had happened with the BCCI.
[Guest 2]: So I wore that outfit.
[Guest 2]: I went into the middle of the pitch and I was just about to record and walk in Sunil Gavaskar.
[Guest 2]: And he says, why are you wearing these colors?
[Guest 2]: So I got a shock of my life that in front of the entire crew and all these guys shouting at me.
[Guest 2]: And I was 29-30, so I just stopped for a moment, but I didn't say anything to him.
[Guest 2]: He continued, you've not played test cricket for India.
[Guest 2]: Why are you wearing the India colors?
[Guest 2]: And this is just ridiculous what this has come to.
[Guest 2]: Test match cricket has certain value and started giving me a lecture on the ground in front of everybody.
[Guest 2]: Now, I am thinking this is an official merchandise that I've picked up from a Nike showroom.
[Amit Varma]: Anybody can wear it.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: So the producer is there and I'm asking him that, what is the story?
[Guest 2]: Suddenly I see Harsha Bhogle walk and Ravi Shastri walk close and say that,
[Guest 2]: Sunny bhai, this is available in the shop.
[Guest 2]: This is a Nike deal.
[Guest 2]: Anybody in the audience can wear it also.
[Guest 2]: No, no, this is just, you know, you test cricket is for pride and some shit he gave me for 20 seconds.
[Guest 2]: I kept quiet.
[Guest 2]: Did that episode a little bit.
[Guest 2]: Now, that's when I realized that this guy is extremely moody.
[Guest 2]: I walk up to the commentary box.
[Guest 2]: I tell the producer that, you know, this is not something I'll appreciate.
[Guest 2]: But he said, nahi yaar, moody aadmi hai, don't get upset and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: That same evening, if I'm not mistaken, was a small episode that I had to do with Gavaskar only along with Wasim Akram and Alan Wilkins.
[Guest 2]: So at that point of time, there was this thing about wives and girlfriends coming to cricket tournaments.
[Guest 2]: So when Alan asked me this question in that segment in On Tee Spot, I said that this is a question I cannot answer.
[Guest 2]: I think I'll leave it to Wasim bhai and Sunny bhai.
[Guest 2]: I don't know what Sunny bhai thought.
[Guest 2]: He gave the answer and then he threw a big tantrum after that.
[Unknown]: This is not right. Who are these people?
[Guest 2]: And remember, I have worked with this guy in professional management group in my first job.
[Guest 2]: So he knows me.
[Guest 2]: And he started behaving so I went and said, Sunny bhai, did I say something wrong?
[Guest 2]: I'll apologize and all of that.
[Guest 2]: And then he said he didn't acknowledge me and he just walked away.
[Guest 2]: That's when I went to the producer and I said, listen, give me my ticket back.
[Guest 2]: I'm not going to take this shit anymore.
[Guest 2]: I never wanted to be a broadcaster.
[Guest 2]: You got me into broadcasting. I'm here to entertain.
[Guest 2]: I will do a stand up act for your guests and whatever.
[Guest 2]: But this is the behavior I will not tolerate.
[Guest 2]: And the worst thing is he's my hero.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we've idolized this guy.
[Guest 2]: And he said, nahi yaar, wo aisa hi hai, yeh, wo, yeh, wo karke.
[Guest 2]: But I said, chalo, theek hai, maan jate hain.
[Guest 2]: So second test match, I had a good time.
[Guest 2]: Third test match, we unfortunately kept down, we lost.
[Guest 2]: But there were some good innings, great cricket to watch.
[Guest 2]: But the baggage was still there because he was behaving very rudely.
[Unknown]: Throughout?
[Guest 2]: Throughout. Means he was not acknowledging me only.
[Guest 2]: And then that day, I decided on my flight back.
[Guest 2]: And interestingly, on the flight back, just before the flight,
[Guest 2]: when I was driving to the airport, I got stopped by cops.
[Guest 2]: And this is like, you know, I'm an ICC, whatever, ESPN commentator.
[Guest 2]: They stopped me in the middle of the journey to the airport.
[Guest 2]: And those two cops looked at me and said, you know, open, open, open.
[Guest 2]: Drugs, drugs, drugs.
[Guest 2]: And I'm like, what is wrong?
[Guest 2]: And they're like, I'm going to the airport to catch my flight.
[Guest 2]: And they take all of the money out of my wallet.
[Guest 2]: And say that, you know, you go like this.
[Guest 2]: These are cops doing it to a commentator in South Africa.
[Guest 2]: Going, somebody going to the airport.
[Guest 2]: Itna open pagalpan chal raha tha uss time.
[Guest 2]: Anyway, airport mein main gaya, flight pe baitha.
[Guest 2]: Aur maine kaha ki, broadcasting ke nazdeek, life mein kabhi nahi aane ka.
[Guest 2]: Because what I had seen, Amit, was that Harsha had gone through all of this for a long time.
[Guest 2]: But Harsha is obsessed by cricket and commentary.
[Guest 2]: He can't do anything else.
[Guest 2]: So he did not have the option that I had.
[Guest 2]: Where I said, boss, yeh mereko yeh click ke nazdeek aane ka hi nahi.
[Guest 2]: Because they will not accept anybody from the outside.
[Guest 2]: It's not, means they're insecure.
[Guest 2]: And specially Sunny bhai was insecure about any, that's what I thought.
[Guest 2]: What was I going to do to Sunny Gavaskar?
[Guest 2]: He's a living legend.
[Guest 2]: And why am I going to do anything that is going to affect him?
[Guest 2]: But then I realized that this is how it's going to be in commentary.
[Guest 2]: If you are able to, and Harsha has taken all of this stress and the insults
[Guest 2]: over a period of 24, 30, 40 years or whatever he's done broadcasting.
[Guest 2]: But he knows this is his calling.
[Guest 2]: There's nothing else I'll do.
[Guest 2]: And therefore he did that.
[Guest 2]: I said, I'm not going to do it.
[Guest 2]: I came back and I'd heard that a lot of things happened in ESPN after that.
[Guest 2]: I said, boss, stand up comedy karenge and I'll create my own ecosystem of content,
[Guest 2]: which I will do on live shows.
[Guest 2]: Luckily, YouTube had just started.
[Guest 2]: So that clip of Seat Awards now was the first comedy clip on YouTube to go viral.
[Guest 2]: So everybody knew what I was doing.
[Guest 2]: And therefore I said that any content that comes, which is apart from broadcasting,
[Guest 2]: I will do on cricket.
[Guest 2]: And hopefully at some point of time, create my own content on YouTube.
[Guest 2]: And I will leave this game from that point of view, because I realized that this is
[Guest 2]: the only country where the board decides who the commentator is.
[Guest 2]: It's not the broadcaster's prerogative.
[Guest 2]: And these guys are not going to accept any outsider coming and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: And that's what changed my life.
[Guest 2]: And I'm very happy that I didn't stay in broadcasting because I would not have
[Guest 2]: been able to live this under pressure kind of life.
[Guest 2]: Came back home.
[Guest 2]: Thankfully, the corporate boom.
[Guest 2]: And that was that period of great fun because every corporate was taking their
[Guest 2]: dealers and listing employees to South Africa, to Greece.
[Guest 2]: So with that 2007-12 period, I probably would have done hundreds and thousands of
[Guest 2]: shows, 200-300 shows, just traveling abroad with 500 dealers.
[Guest 2]: And sometimes I do it in my jokes.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's to say that Gujarat became more vibrant, not because of the
[Guest 2]: chief minister there, but because of Bangkok.
[Guest 2]: Because all sales targets were dependent on going to Bangkok.
[Guest 2]: And if you did well, and Gujaratis who had never gone beyond Bhavsar and Nadiad,
[Guest 2]: they went to Bangkok and they were happy.
[Guest 2]: They doubled their turnover.
[Guest 2]: And sometimes I feel that we revived the Thailand economy.
[Unknown]: They turned over and they turned over.
[Unknown]: It was a family show.
[Guest 2]: But Amit, you will not believe and Roshan will agree to this.
[Unknown]: Every weekend we were in Bangkok because every corporate did gigs only in Bangkok.
[Guest 2]: Thailand hates India because the kind of rada that Indian dealers have done in
[Guest 1]: Bangkok is unbelievable.
[Guest 1]: I'll just tell you one small incident.
[Guest 1]: We're doing one event together.
[Guest 1]: And this is for a erstwhile computer company.
[Guest 1]: And we've done the thing and whatever.
[Guest 1]: And the show's gone very well.
[Guest 1]: Award night has happened.
[Guest 1]: We guys are back at the hotel.
[Guest 1]: And the marketing director of the company is a good friend of ours.
[Guest 1]: And she's very happy.
[Guest 1]: Everything's gone well.
[Guest 1]: Now all these dealers after the show have gone to town.
[Guest 1]: And they've come back with people.
[Guest 1]: And as they're entering the hotel or whatever, suddenly they see that in the
[Guest 1]: lobby is standing the marketing director and we all are behind.
[Guest 1]: Now they have told all the women to buzz off.
[Guest 1]: And they've entered the lobby.
[Guest 1]: And these girls are holding their passports saying, I'm clean.
[Guest 1]: I'm clean.
[Guest 1]: I can come to your room.
[Unknown]: And they're saying, no, no.
[Unknown]: Madam.
[Unknown]: Sister.
[Unknown]: Sister, madam.
[Guest 1]: I mean, you've seen so many of these scenes.
[Guest 1]: It's crazy.
[Guest 1]: People would, you know, some dealers would shoplift.
[Unknown]: They would do.
[Guest 1]: People would because, you know.
[Unknown]: They picked her up.
[Guest 1]: They picked her up.
[Guest 1]: I mean, they're stopping her.
[Guest 1]: They're saving her from arrest.
[Guest 2]: What a story.
[Unknown]: No, no.
[Guest 1]: Indians had not traveled abroad to that extent.
[Guest 2]: And now all these companies were taking, which is good for us, right?
[Guest 2]: Because we were entertaining these people abroad.
[Guest 2]: But many of the stories were, they did not know how to use an Indian.
[Guest 2]: Sorry.
[Guest 1]: Western toilet.
[Guest 2]: And they would do things on that toilet which had to be sorted by the company
[Guest 2]: heads before they had exited the hotel.
[Guest 2]: It was a chaotic time.
[Amit Varma]: What would they do in the toilets?
[Guest 1]: Just let your imagination wander.
[Guest 1]: No, no.
[Guest 1]: Not just that.
[Guest 1]: I'm telling you.
[Guest 1]: So, occasionally when people used to go through security check and they had to open their bags,
[Guest 1]: they would have bath towels, bathrobes, soaps.
[Guest 1]: Someone even carried the safe from the hotel.
[Unknown]: It was crazy.
[Unknown]: Sir, was it in the room?
[Unknown]: It was in the room.
[Unknown]: They've taken everything from the room.
[Unknown]: Oh, my God.
[Guest 2]: But it was crazy.
[Guest 2]: Cruises, performing.
[Guest 2]: And you know, we were always, the fillers were always just before the item number performed.
[Guest 2]: So all the actresses or whatever, it was called item number show.
[Guest 2]: And after the stand-up comedy would come the item number.
[Guest 2]: And so I was always in trouble.
[Guest 2]: Because dealers, internal audience, they would still listen to humor and all of that.
[Unknown]: But the dealers would want the item number to come.
[Guest 2]: So for that 20 minutes for me in between, I was the big wall between them.
[Guest 2]: But still I managed to do 3,000 shows, which shows how hot I am.
[Amit Varma]: 3,000 shows?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: My God.
[Guest 2]: So that was a fun journey.
[Guest 2]: But this is where my intellectual part of the story started.
[Guest 2]: The touring was going on.
[Guest 2]: So because I had befriended the cricketers by now, in the middle of a tour,
[Guest 2]: having a nice meal or dinner with, say, Rahul Dravid, or for that matter, Asaurav Ganguly,
[Guest 2]: maybe sometimes members from the opposition team who had seen me perform in probably an ICC cricket event somewhere.
[Guest 2]: This was where my actual journey started.
[Guest 2]: To live international sport at the time when the action is happening.
[Guest 2]: So when you know the next session for the test match is interesting,
[Guest 2]: and you've had dinner with, say, Anil Kumble the night before,
[Guest 2]: because you bumped into him in some Indian restaurant,
[Guest 2]: and then he's kind of sharing the dynamics.
[Guest 2]: That's when the games kind of started opening up for me,
[Guest 2]: where I started understanding the psychology of sport,
[Guest 2]: the physicality of sport, the human behavior side of it,
[Guest 2]: the competitive advantage that people get out of sledging.
[Guest 2]: What is purposeful practice?
[Guest 2]: What is team dynamics?
[Guest 2]: What is advantage during sessions?
[Guest 2]: What is mental makeup?
[Guest 2]: What is routine?
[Guest 2]: What is visualization?
[Guest 2]: So this started getting easier and easier for me to understand,
[Guest 2]: because I was hearing it from the horse's mouth at the time when the action was happening.
[Guest 2]: So 2006 onwards to 2013 till Sachin retired,
[Guest 2]: that seven years I lived cricket in its totality.
[Guest 2]: Because even before the Sydney Gate happened,
[Guest 2]: or after the Sydney Gate happened, I was in that press conference,
[Guest 2]: what Robak was writing about Ricky Ponting,
[Guest 2]: my interaction with Ricky Ponting during that particular tour.
[Guest 2]: So this was like gold dust coming to me and saying,
[Guest 2]: forget the comedy, this is what you've been waiting for.
[Guest 2]: And that was the reason that book happened,
[Guest 2]: because I thought that, hey, I am privy to so many of these stories,
[Guest 2]: real time, let me try and see if I can use humor and put it in a book format.
[Guest 2]: That is where I got interested in sports psychology,
[Guest 2]: where I said, boss, the dynamics of understanding human behavior
[Guest 2]: in the context of high performance sport is the ultimate you can ever get.
[Guest 2]: And cricket is a very amazing game because it has so many facets,
[Guest 2]: unlike football where, you know, whatever,
[Guest 2]: number of people playing for one and a half hours and it's over.
[Guest 2]: There's a wicketkeeper who has his own story.
[Guest 2]: There is a third man who has his own story.
[Guest 2]: There is a spin bowler who's coming with a new ball who has his own story,
[Guest 2]: which Ashwin beautifully explains in What The Duck,
[Guest 2]: my show where he talks about, you know, Ajinkya Rahane giving him a new ball
[Guest 2]: because he realized that there's moisture and spin might help him in Melbourne.
[Guest 2]: And that's how he got Steve Smith out.
[Guest 2]: So all these stories, imagine happening to you while the process is on,
[Unknown]: was like, means I was learning and learning.
[Guest 2]: I said, cricket is life.
[Guest 2]: So many things are being taught to me through this wonderful game.
[Guest 2]: And I was growing as a person.
[Guest 2]: And I thought that cricket is actually the real subject I should have learned in school.
[Guest 2]: And then the unraveling of Tendulkar.
[Guest 2]: And I'm understanding why this happened.
[Guest 2]: Attention to detail, the preparation.
[Guest 2]: 2011, I remember Sachin Tendulkar was not in form.
[Guest 2]: Rahul Dravid was getting bold to Hilfenhaus.
[Guest 2]: Every test match that he played, we lost that series after winning,
[Guest 2]: after losing a close game at Melbourne.
[Guest 2]: I remember going with Sachin to a vineyard,
[Guest 2]: and he explaining to me the dynamics of how we lost that test.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, talking to Rahul about how his mental frame was extremely good
[Guest 2]: during the Melbourne test.
[Guest 2]: And after that, it started going down.
[Guest 2]: This was a lesson in psychology.
[Guest 2]: This was a lesson in human behavior,
[Guest 2]: which I was just grasping.
[Guest 2]: I said, hey, let me just continue my comedy till the time I can
[Guest 2]: in order to get a sense of what is happening in the world.
[Guest 2]: But I realized that my money was coming through corporate India.
[Guest 2]: And that's when, as Roshan said, that the musical part of it,
[Guest 2]: I started developing observations, politics, current affairs,
[Guest 2]: all these things I started writing on my own so that my act would become more robust.
[Guest 2]: Because at any given point of time,
[Guest 2]: a stand-up comedian should have three hours of material.
[Guest 2]: So your 20 minutes get repeated, which is your best,
[Guest 2]: because you're safe,
[Guest 2]: unless you know the audience is a little open with experimentation.
[Guest 2]: Because unlike the comedy movement,
[Guest 2]: which started with say Veer Das and Papa CJ sometime in 2008-9,
[Guest 2]: I had no concept of experimenting in a club,
[Guest 2]: getting my material tested and doing it in a corporate show.
[Guest 2]: All my testing was happening on real-time shows.
[Guest 2]: So my risk-taking ability went down
[Guest 2]: because I could not have risked material in an Asian paint show.
[Guest 2]: So what I would do is make three to five minutes of new material.
[Guest 2]: If I would go from Asian paints to Procter & Gamble,
[Guest 2]: I would test this five minutes.
[Guest 2]: From Procter & Gamble to ICICI, I would test another two minutes.
[Guest 2]: But it took me six months to make 30 new minutes.
[Guest 2]: Whereas if I was a club comedian,
[Guest 2]: I would have tested material every day.
[Guest 2]: But by the time this culture happened,
[Guest 2]: I had already done 8-10 years of work.
[Guest 2]: And then again, inertia had set in.
[Guest 1]: And I was saying that I had bargained for comedy.
[Guest 1]: It was input-output.
[Guest 1]: I told him, why don't you do a TV special?
[Guest 1]: He says, I will do the same joke 100 times in different corporate shows.
[Guest 1]: It's new.
[Guest 1]: Once I did it on TV, everyone heard it.
[Guest 1]: And it's a philosophy.
[Guest 1]: Because I work with Veer and Zakir and all these guys.
[Guest 1]: And I see them.
[Guest 1]: They will develop material for a year.
[Guest 1]: They will test it.
[Guest 1]: Possibly take another year to hone it.
[Guest 1]: And it's got a two-year kind of cycle.
[Guest 1]: At the end of the two years, they'll do a TV special.
[Guest 1]: Then that material is over.
[Guest 1]: And then it moves on to a new chunk or whatever.
[Guest 2]: I really think Saty could have done that.
[Guest 2]: But what happened was that this was not in my prime.
[Unknown]: I had done my prime.
[Guest 2]: And I was excited by this other thing.
[Guest 2]: Then that comedy movement started.
[Guest 2]: And Roshan used to tell me that
[Guest 2]: Saty, you come in this zone.
[Guest 2]: You are way ahead of them.
[Guest 2]: I said, I am not in the game.
[Guest 2]: What do I do now?
[Guest 2]: I am enjoying here.
[Guest 2]: And that's where I think it's my fault that I didn't push myself.
[Guest 2]: I could have probably got
[Guest 2]: 6 or 8 specials by now.
[Guest 2]: Because I had so much of material gathered over a period of time.
[Guest 2]: But then this interested me more.
[Guest 2]: And then this journey started.
[Guest 2]: Which led to what the duck might show.
[Guest 2]: And as we go further,
[Guest 2]: I will probably break down on various
[Guest 2]: special qualities of the
[Guest 2]: sports people that I saw.
[Guest 2]: And probably put it in context of
[Guest 2]: what is that one thing I learnt out of those players.
[Guest 2]: But this journey
[Guest 2]: of unravelling a high performance athlete
[Guest 2]: was the best thing I experienced
[Amit Varma]: in my life.
[Amit Varma]: So 5 or 6 things I want to double click on.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is this.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned that initially,
[Amit Varma]: it was an accident. You were good at imitating people.
[Amit Varma]: You got a chance. It was funny.
[Amit Varma]: It was great. It worked.
[Amit Varma]: Then you go to South Africa.
[Amit Varma]: And it works so well.
[Amit Varma]: And you are fully in that mahal.
[Amit Varma]: And you are thinking, this is working for me.
[Amit Varma]: This is what my comedy will be.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems there that what happens is
[Amit Varma]: that the incentives that are at play
[Amit Varma]: are taking your comedy
[Amit Varma]: into a particular direction.
[Amit Varma]: And not allowing you
[Amit Varma]: to take it into other directions
[Amit Varma]: which could also have been rewarding for you.
[Amit Varma]: And I am thinking in terms of creators.
[Amit Varma]: These are choices
[Amit Varma]: all creators are confronted with at some point
[Amit Varma]: in time. You can take your work
[Amit Varma]: in one direction or you can
[Amit Varma]: take it into the other direction.
[Amit Varma]: And you make a choice. And that choice changes
[Amit Varma]: what you do. And then what you do changes
[Amit Varma]: who you are. And you become a completely
[Amit Varma]: different person. Like maybe for example
[Amit Varma]: if the actual stand-up scene
[Amit Varma]: if the scene starts earlier
[Amit Varma]: or you come later.
[Amit Varma]: Then you might say that cricket is fine.
[Amit Varma]: That's just one thing. Let me also do this.
[Amit Varma]: And then you become the Veer Das or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Or the line you chose
[Amit Varma]: which was to go sort of
[Amit Varma]: much more into cricket.
[Amit Varma]: So did you feel at the time
[Amit Varma]: that it was a compromise that you were making
[Amit Varma]: that there was a trade-off involved?
[Amit Varma]: Or were you just fully happy saying that
[Amit Varma]: this is fine. Let me just not overthink it.
[Guest 2]: Just go with it. Totally.
[Guest 2]: As we discussed, there was
[Guest 2]: no calling of stand-up.
[Guest 2]: People like Veer and CJ
[Guest 2]: and all those, they wanted to become
[Guest 2]: comedians.
[Guest 2]: Veer Das has been studying
[Guest 2]: comedy since the time he finished
[Guest 2]: his graduation and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: I was an accidental comedian.
[Guest 2]: But for me what was important was
[Guest 2]: my first love which was cricket.
[Guest 2]: And therefore the comedy was just a way
[Guest 2]: to reach the world of cricket.
[Guest 2]: The moment it started working and I realized that
[Guest 2]: boss I have it in me to explore
[Guest 2]: the larger canvas. That is when
[Guest 2]: I started doing other material to survive
[Guest 2]: in this world. And then obviously
[Guest 2]: there was a business model at play. The incentive was
[Guest 2]: very very simple. If I have to continue
[Guest 2]: my stand-up career in the corporate
[Guest 2]: which is going to pay my bills and not cricket
[Guest 2]: because cricket is a choice I have made.
[Guest 2]: I have stayed away from broadcast because broadcast
[Guest 2]: is where the money is.
[Guest 2]: So I have stayed away from that. So I will get my
[Guest 2]: ROI from my corporate shows
[Guest 2]: for which I now need to start talking
[Guest 2]: about what is happening around the world, human
[Guest 2]: behavior, little bit of Bollywood
[Guest 2]: music and all of that.
[Guest 2]: That keeps my system going and
[Guest 2]: makes me go into the world that I love
[Guest 2]: to be in. So my ability
[Guest 2]: to spend two months in Australia
[Guest 2]: during a test series was actually
[Guest 2]: only one or two shows. The extension
[Guest 2]: was paid by me.
[Guest 2]: So that I could fund
[Guest 2]: only because I could do this.
[Guest 2]: Unfortunately because I didn't have the drive for
[Guest 2]: comedy which is like
[Guest 2]: let's do a new act. Let's do this.
[Guest 2]: Let's do shows in the world. I don't want to do it.
[Guest 2]: Australia, South Africa, West Indies
[Guest 2]: Sri Lanka, Bangladesh
[Guest 2]: this is done. So I think
[Guest 2]: it was a problem of again the core
[Guest 2]: point that I made that I was just happy
[Guest 2]: in the current moment and that
[Guest 2]: didn't drive excellence from a creative perspective.
[Guest 2]: Which today I don't have any regrets
[Guest 2]: but I thought I should have pushed myself a little
[Guest 2]: bit more to explore this so much.
[Guest 2]: Today I feel because I am
[Guest 2]: now evolved into, I want
[Guest 2]: to know more about so many different
[Guest 2]: things under the sun which was not
[Guest 2]: there 10 years back.
[Guest 2]: In the last 8 to 9 years
[Guest 2]: probably I have said that hey
[Guest 2]: I don't even want to do comedy now.
[Guest 2]: I want to actually try something completely different.
[Guest 2]: Because when your
[Guest 2]: growth stops
[Guest 2]: then you realize that
[Guest 2]: boss that profession is not worth chasing.
[Guest 2]: And that has happened to me
[Guest 2]: every 5-6 years with what I have done.
[Guest 2]: So today comedy is absolutely
[Guest 2]: not interested at all. But now I am putting
[Guest 2]: a frame to myself and saying that
[Guest 2]: hey can I spend
[Guest 2]: 3 sessions with Vijay Gokhale
[Guest 2]: who gave me a great perspective on China
[Guest 2]: and can I put something interesting which
[Guest 2]: may not be pure stand up but a perspective
[Guest 2]: on what happened from Deng to
[Guest 2]: Xi Jinping. I am thinking on those lines
[Guest 2]: it may never happen. I am just giving
[Guest 2]: you a China example because it just
[Guest 2]: happened 15 days back. But
[Guest 2]: maybe my way of comedy
[Guest 2]: is now to explore areas
[Guest 2]: because what is the beauty of comedy
[Guest 2]: is the moment you want to look at humor
[Guest 2]: in a mundane subject
[Guest 2]: your ability to
[Guest 2]: grasp things becomes stronger. Because comedy
[Guest 2]: means thinking. And that's why
[Guest 2]: if I am reading a book today I would take
[Guest 2]: 6 months to finish a big book because
[Guest 2]: every 8 pages I would be
[Guest 2]: probably thinking that this is like this
[Guest 2]: we can treat it like this. There is a correlation in this.
[Guest 2]: Comedy is what? Joining
[Guest 2]: two dots. You have
[Guest 2]: read this and this. When you
[Guest 2]: add this in comedy, you get fun out of it.
[Guest 2]: So today I am seeing if I
[Guest 2]: can evolve myself and use
[Guest 2]: comedy for something else to
[Guest 2]: get knowledge and be curious
[Guest 2]: about a different world which I did for cricket.
[Guest 2]: But it's still
[Guest 2]: an exploratory thought. Unfortunately
[Guest 2]: my outcome has never been that
[Guest 2]: I make a great creative piece.
[Guest 2]: And that is what Roshan always criticizes
[Guest 2]: me for. Why aren't you
[Guest 2]: giving a creative output?
[Guest 2]: I am not able to do that.
[Guest 2]: What is going on
[Guest 2]: and survival for that moment
[Guest 2]: Tomorrow he tells me that
[Guest 2]: hey I am doing a show. You have to make a 20 minute
[Guest 2]: piece on this. Then I will go and do it.
[Guest 2]: But that's not creative.
[Guest 2]: That is
[Guest 2]: this beautiful word that Vijay Tendulkar
[Guest 2]: only told me once.
[Guest 2]: I asked him what is creative?
[Guest 2]: He said urgency.
[Guest 2]: I didn't understand this. He said
[Guest 2]: Vikram, sometimes a lot of
[Guest 2]: creativity is wasted.
[Guest 2]: I was an editor of Maharashtra Times.
[Guest 2]: I used to get this much time
[Guest 2]: and I used to write my story
[Guest 2]: on the train. And I had
[Guest 2]: deadlines to submit that story.
[Guest 2]: And my best creative work happened in
[Guest 2]: deadlines. So that urgency of
[Guest 2]: the project helped me get the most
[Guest 2]: creative I could ever get.
[Guest 2]: Now some people might disagree
[Guest 2]: with this theory. But I think this is a very
[Guest 2]: interesting theory because my good creative
[Guest 2]: work also has come under pressure.
[Guest 2]: But because I was a freelancer
[Guest 2]: my pressure on myself was not good enough.
[Guest 1]: This is the, Saty will not
[Guest 1]: admit it, this is the M-cube theory
[Guest 1]: of Vikram Saty. Middle class
[Guest 1]: Maharashtrian millionaire.
[Guest 1]: Look, I had
[Guest 1]: a very small area. I was getting
[Guest 1]: salary, that was enough.
[Guest 1]: Suddenly I discovered comedy.
[Guest 1]: From comedy to cash register.
[Guest 1]: He was raking it in. Sometimes
[Guest 1]: when I tried to put numbers, he gets so shy.
[Guest 1]: He doesn't even discuss his own money
[Guest 1]: with anyone in his life.
[Guest 1]: You will get it. You are printing.
[Guest 1]: Favorite life.
[Guest 1]: My thing is, my math
[Guest 1]: immediately works. If you do 3000 shows
[Guest 1]: and I calculate,
[Guest 1]: put a base of 1 lakh.
[Guest 1]: It will be 30 crores.
[Guest 1]: No, I used to do 2000 in the beginning.
[Guest 1]: But
[Guest 1]: the logic is, now what happened?
[Guest 1]: So you found that
[Guest 1]: source, creative goal
[Guest 1]: and comedy was never his goal.
[Guest 1]: Right. But it was a combination
[Guest 1]: as you said, what he said, that cricket, which was
[Guest 1]: something he loved. Yes, intellectual
[Guest 1]: pursuit. See, his desperation
[Guest 1]: is to be known as an intellectual.
[Guest 1]: I can tell you even today. Why did he write a book?
[Guest 1]: Because when you write a book,
[Guest 1]: you become a person.
[Guest 1]: I will say more things.
[Guest 1]: After that, why did he do TV?
[Guest 1]: At that time, Sathe was a creative entrepreneur.
[Guest 1]: He did 3 creative ventures.
[Guest 1]: Multiple things. I do this, I do that.
[Guest 1]: I do this, I do that.
[Guest 1]: Then he realized, this is too much hard work.
[Guest 1]: It was the
[Guest 1]: middle class Maharashtrian.
[Guest 1]: Why should I do this? Make 4 jokes.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Unknown]: In an event of 1 crore, 10% will be made.
[Guest 1]: After 2 months
[Guest 1]: of work, I could earn
[Guest 1]: that 10% in 4 days.
[Guest 1]: At that point in time, now in 2 days.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So why should I do it?
[Guest 1]: Input, output, effort.
[Guest 1]: Now everybody was doing TV.
[Guest 1]: Everyone is doing it.
[Guest 1]: YouTube, everyone is doing it.
[Guest 1]: Then reluctant creator
[Guest 1]: let's do it.
[Guest 1]: But again,
[Guest 1]: safe reluctant creator,
[Guest 1]: won't do it without a sponsor.
[Guest 1]: I found a person who will pay me
[Guest 1]: to make the show, now I will make it.
[Guest 1]: Sathe is risk taking.
[Guest 1]: He didn't take the risk.
[Guest 1]: But that's why I say,
[Guest 1]: because what he has achieved
[Guest 1]: within this framework is so
[Guest 1]: good that if he just
[Guest 1]: took that leap of faith.
[Guest 1]: I will keep saying this all my life.
[Guest 1]: Next time, avoid me like this.
[Guest 1]: Let's meet.
[Guest 1]: But that's what I keep
[Guest 1]: saying that it's that.
[Guest 1]: And I will tell you one thing.
[Guest 1]: Now comedy, what he has not told you.
[Guest 1]: Sathe believes that in the first 8-10
[Guest 1]: years of comedy, he was lucky.
[Guest 1]: No, he was bloody talented.
[Guest 1]: And he had a niche.
[Guest 1]: Sir, we spent 10 years in comedy.
[Guest 1]: After that, there are comedians
[Guest 1]: in every corner. You get them for 10,000
[Guest 1]: or 50,000.
[Guest 1]: You're seeing threat to livelihood.
[Guest 1]: You don't need livelihood.
[Guest 1]: Sathe's entire thing was
[Guest 1]: he built a beautiful little house with this lovely
[Guest 1]: little place below where you can have concerts.
[Unknown]: Sathe is done with Akbar Azam.
[Unknown]: His Navratans are going on every day.
[Guest 1]: Everything is happening.
[Guest 1]: Now what is left?
[Guest 1]: Next intellectual level. Give back.
[Guest 1]: That's one area to focus on.
[Guest 1]: Where is the money coming from?
[Guest 1]: Motivational speakers make more money.
[Guest 1]: He knows.
[Guest 1]: He gets 10.
[Guest 1]: Host gets 2.5.
[Guest 1]: How can I go in the range of 10?
[Guest 1]: Sathe has figured out
[Guest 1]: creative business.
[Guest 1]: More than most of us.
[Guest 1]: But only applies it to the individual enterprise.
[Guest 1]: I keep pushing him.
[Guest 1]: You should have used it for a bigger enterprise.
[Guest 2]: To become an entrepreneur,
[Guest 2]: you require a tremendous amount of drive.
[Guest 2]: And I start with this thing
[Guest 2]: that that drive is not in me, but in Roshan.
[Guest 2]: The problem is
[Guest 2]: I push Roshan, but he didn't
[Amit Varma]: give me a stake in any business.
[Guest 2]: Very sad.
[Guest 2]: I pushed him so much, but he didn't give me a stake.
[Guest 2]: That is where my
[Amit Varma]: fiending went wrong.
[Amit Varma]: I think of every creator
[Amit Varma]: in a sense as an entrepreneur
[Amit Varma]: of his own brand.
[Amit Varma]: Do you actually think like that?
[Amit Varma]: Or are you more like me?
[Amit Varma]: Unfortunately, I should think more like that.
[Amit Varma]: Or are you more like me where you are just
[Amit Varma]: taking joy in the things that you do?
[Guest 2]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: It's sad that I can do marketing
[Guest 2]: plans for everyone except for me.
[Guest 2]: Because somehow again
[Guest 2]: that thing, right?
[Guest 2]: Intentionally friendship.
[Guest 2]: In the same groove, what marketing for yourself?
[Guest 2]: Does anyone do this?
[Guest 2]: Till date,
[Guest 2]: in my entire career, I have not done
[Guest 2]: a single PR item.
[Guest 2]: As an entertainer, you should have a PR company
[Guest 2]: supporting you because your brand should be built.
[Guest 2]: But for me, I have recommended
[Guest 2]: PR companies to a hundred talent
[Guest 2]: including cricketer that you should design
[Guest 2]: your PR. This is what you should.
[Guest 2]: But when it comes to myself, I can't do it because I have
[Guest 2]: too much of a baggage of somebody
[Guest 2]: my father or my mother telling me
[Amit Varma]: that don't buy or don't think.
[Guest 2]: Never do this. Your work should speak
[Amit Varma]: for yourself. Yeah, I keep telling people
[Amit Varma]: good product is the best marketing.
[Amit Varma]: But maybe I am reflecting the same.
[Amit Varma]: Somebody should sing
[Amit Varma]: a song to you.
[Unknown]: Exactly. That was my joke also.
[Unknown]: That was your joke also.
[Amit Varma]: I think
[Unknown]: it's that MTV heritage
[Amit Varma]: of celebrating bad jokes.
[Amit Varma]: So, I have a couple of more questions
[Amit Varma]: on your cricket times.
[Amit Varma]: They both sort of arise
[Amit Varma]: from the same situation
[Amit Varma]: where you are someone who played cricket
[Amit Varma]: passionately, knew the game,
[Amit Varma]: understood the game really well.
[Amit Varma]: But you didn't reach that level of that
[Amit Varma]: Tendulkar and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then later on, you make an
[Amit Varma]: entry and you are with all of them.
[Amit Varma]: So, now a couple
[Amit Varma]: of sort of questions arise
[Amit Varma]: here. And one is
[Amit Varma]: that in terms of human beings
[Amit Varma]: like all these guys are your personal friends now
[Amit Varma]: right? But the thing is when you first interact
[Amit Varma]: with them, they are also wary. Because they are
[Amit Varma]: superstars and they are wary of
[Amit Varma]: anybody else basically.
[Amit Varma]: And some like Sunny Bhai
[Amit Varma]: could be, you know, are also
[Amit Varma]: fierce about protecting their turf.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, they are wary, they have learned
[Amit Varma]: to be wary, they have learned to distrust the press
[Amit Varma]: and distrust others and they are kind of in their
[Amit Varma]: own bubble. So, how was it
[Amit Varma]: then? But I would imagine that once you
[Amit Varma]: break past that bubble, for you to have that
[Amit Varma]: personal relationship with them
[Amit Varma]: becomes much easier because you
[Amit Varma]: have also played cricket at Dadar Gymkhana
[Amit Varma]: or Shivaji Park or wherever you played. You've gone
[Amit Varma]: through the grind of doing all that.
[Amit Varma]: You bowled to Sachin, you once said, which
[Amit Varma]: in fact you must answer first, what was
[Amit Varma]: that like? So,
[Amit Varma]: how was it like breaking
[Amit Varma]: through and then those personal relationships
[Amit Varma]: and do you find that people
[Amit Varma]: at the top like that
[Amit Varma]: are a special kind of lonely?
[Amit Varma]: Because you have access
[Amit Varma]: cut off completely from the normal
[Amit Varma]: world and the normal life and the
[Amit Varma]: normal friendships like, let's meet at Starbucks
[Amit Varma]: and you can't quite do that.
[Amit Varma]: Or let's meet at Katte.
[Amit Varma]: So, what was it
[Amit Varma]: kind of, what was that like?
[Amit Varma]: That once you break past the barrier, can you
[Amit Varma]: also then just see them as normal people?
[Amit Varma]: You've reached a new level but
[Amit Varma]: essentially you are the same.
[Amit Varma]: You also love cricket, you also play cricket.
[Guest 2]: So, after my experience
[Guest 2]: with Sunny and when your
[Guest 2]: idol lets you down
[Guest 2]: what happens is that
[Guest 2]: you create a philosophy
[Guest 2]: for yourself saying that never meet
[Guest 2]: your idols. Because let them
[Guest 2]: be there, just admire
[Guest 2]: them because when you know them as a person
[Guest 2]: you kind of get a little
[Guest 2]: defeated by this entire
[Guest 2]: experience. And that happened with Sunny
[Guest 2]: but life
[Guest 2]: was good. Then came Sachin Tendulkar
[Guest 2]: who probably is one of the finest human
[Guest 2]: beings that I met in this
[Guest 2]: especially in this cricketing zone.
[Guest 2]: The most secure and we were
[Guest 2]: very lucky that we
[Guest 2]: toured at a time when
[Guest 2]: there are too many good people in one team.
[Guest 2]: See, whatever said and done
[Guest 2]: I don't think, it's like in one of your
[Guest 2]: episodes, one of the speakers says that
[Guest 2]: there is SD Burman, there is Naushad,
[Guest 2]: there is Madan Mohan, there is Shankar
[Guest 2]: Jayakishan. This is a time of
[Guest 2]: music that can never be replicated
[Guest 2]: again. I think Tendulkar,
[Guest 2]: Dravid, Lakshman, Sehwag,
[Guest 2]: Kumble
[Guest 2]: it's very difficult to get this kind of
[Guest 2]: people in the same team and
[Guest 2]: I was lucky that all these people were
[Guest 2]: very secure.
[Guest 2]: Thankfully, they first became
[Guest 2]: my fan.
[Guest 2]: And they realized I was more than a fan.
[Guest 2]: And I think this
[Guest 2]: transition of being more than a fan
[Guest 2]: is when you get into the inner circle
[Guest 2]: of cricketers. When they realize
[Guest 2]: that boss this guy is not there
[Guest 2]: as a threat, he is genuinely
[Guest 2]: interested in the game, he is making me
[Guest 2]: laugh also and he is asking me
[Guest 2]: questions that are not
[Guest 2]: journalistic.
[Guest 2]: How do you feel?
[Guest 2]: When I am talking of Anil Kumble
[Guest 2]: I am saying that
[Guest 2]: when did you realize that
[Guest 2]: the LBW
[Guest 2]: decision is going to be the biggest decision
[Guest 2]: for you in your life because you are a leg spinner
[Guest 2]: typically only when you
[Guest 2]: bowl a googly it will get you an LBW
[Guest 2]: and he said let me tell you how I did it.
[Guest 2]: And this is also a very funny
[Guest 2]: story. You can prompt me when you
[Guest 2]: want me to tell this story. You can tell the story now.
[Guest 2]: So it's a fascinating
[Guest 2]: story and I asked Anil bhai this
[Guest 2]: question and said that
[Guest 2]: how do you get a LBW
[Guest 2]: decision especially when you
[Guest 2]: got it so often. He said Vikram, the
[Guest 2]: biggest thing in life that I had to do
[Guest 2]: is to convince the umpire that I was not
[Unknown]: a leg spinner.
[Guest 2]: So he said most people
[Guest 2]: perceive me as a leg spinner and
[Guest 2]: that's why they would never give me
[Guest 2]: an LBW decision because
[Guest 2]: for a leg spinner the ball is pitched middle and off, it's going
[Guest 2]: outside and spinners anyway
[Guest 2]: in that time when he started bowling you
[Guest 2]: put the front foot out, you were not given
[Guest 2]: I mean if you look at today's generation
[Guest 2]: probably Gavaskar, Vengsarkar,
[Guest 2]: Javed Miyadad were out 10,000
[Guest 2]: times because there was
[Guest 2]: no concept of deliberate padding right now
[Guest 2]: they used to pad their life through the entire test
[Guest 2]: match but that had stopped
[Guest 2]: so Anil said that there was this
[Guest 2]: umpire, South
[Guest 2]: African umpire who
[Guest 2]: in the West Indies I had to
[Guest 2]: convince him that hey you got
[Guest 2]: to give me an LBW decision but how
[Guest 2]: do I do that? So he said there
[Guest 2]: was net practice, Mohammad Kaif was batting
[Guest 2]: and he said I told Kaif
[Guest 2]: that I will call Brian Juerling
[Guest 2]: you don't play him
[Guest 2]: and let him bat on the pad
[Guest 2]: so practice sessions happening
[Guest 2]: he says Brian why don't you come and
[Guest 2]: do a little bit of umpiring in the nets
[Guest 2]: and Anil said I started
[Guest 2]: bowling to Kaif, Kaif would not play
[Guest 2]: the shot, I said to Brian
[Guest 2]: Juerling how was that?
[Guest 2]: Yeah looks close
[Guest 2]: second ball again he bowls
[Guest 2]: Brian how was that? Yeah looks close
[Guest 2]: Anil said that's what I want to tell you
[Guest 2]: I don't get the leg spinner
[Guest 2]: going, it's the straighter one that matters
[Guest 2]: he said I had left that thought with Brian
[Guest 2]: Juerling, next day he gave me
[Guest 2]: 4 LBWs
[Guest 2]: So the fact that I had asked
[Guest 2]: the right question to Anil Kumble
[Guest 2]: gave me a great story about how
[Guest 2]: a bowler thought
[Guest 2]: through and realized that if he had to get
[Guest 2]: LBWs he had to make the
[Guest 2]: umpire believe that he doesn't spin the ball
[Guest 1]: it's also I think somewhere
[Guest 1]: again it's the knowledge
[Guest 1]: I find that, I believe that the teleprompter
[Guest 1]: was the death of the true host
[Guest 1]: because the true anchor
[Guest 1]: had all that
[Guest 1]: reservoir of knowledge, they knew
[Guest 1]: what to pick when, Sathe doesn't use
[Guest 1]: a teleprompter, I see comedians use teleprompters
[Guest 1]: I see actors trying
[Guest 1]: to tell jokes as anchors
[Guest 1]: of very very big television shows or
[Guest 1]: big stadium shows, every line
[Guest 1]: is up there then where's the joy
[Guest 1]: of what you do, where's the joy
[Guest 1]: of choice, where's the joy of this
[Guest 1]: will get that reaction and it is because
[Guest 1]: of his reservoir of knowledge
[Guest 1]: that he can again be
[Guest 1]: interesting and interested
[Guest 1]: in a manner which is not
[Guest 1]: it's the, I don't know whether when we had spoken
[Guest 1]: last time I had spoken about that Mr. Bachchan
[Guest 1]: interview which was the first thing that I had to
[Guest 1]: do on TV and it was just that I could have just
[Guest 1]: been a fanboy, I was a fanboy but
[Guest 1]: I did my research, I did my homework
[Guest 1]: and so when I go in and I say
[Guest 1]: you know what does it feel like to be the
[Guest 1]: man whose voice brings the country to a stop
[Guest 1]: and be the person who was
[Guest 1]: rejected by All India Radio, everybody is asking
[Unknown]: how do you feel about Mithu Tatam, how do you feel about Mithu Tatam acting
[Guest 1]: how do you feel about working with Madhuri Dixit
[Guest 1]: he's heard that, there is a level
[Guest 1]: of numbness that sets in
[Guest 1]: with the predictability that people do
[Guest 1]: it is the googly that we can
[Guest 1]: throw that makes the difference
[Guest 1]: so often and that really comes
[Guest 1]: I mean what people love, there are so many of your
[Guest 1]: interviews where I have seen people
[Guest 1]: warm up to say oh you did your
[Guest 1]: research, haven't you seen
[Guest 1]: mostly a lot of people I think
[Guest 1]: would be cantankerous at times on your show
[Guest 1]: but they just warm up to the fact of
[Guest 1]: you have given me this much respect
[Guest 1]: you have shown so much interest
[Guest 1]: and this is something which is a
[Guest 1]: commodity, I am telling you the number of
[Guest 1]: there was a person who called me on their podcast and whatever
[Guest 1]: he read out my resume
[Guest 1]: and made every third line a question
[Guest 1]: and I was just so upset
[Guest 1]: I said you read a LinkedIn profile
[Guest 1]: and made me waste an hour
[Guest 1]: and after 5 minutes I started
[Guest 1]: leading him saying okay you are not
[Guest 1]: going to go there, I will take you where I want to
[Guest 1]: but I don't want to waste my hour, but it's just that
[Guest 1]: that people, I just feel that
[Guest 1]: that celebration
[Guest 1]: of research, of depth
[Guest 1]: is, what you say
[Guest 1]: about radio, that radio is shallow and white
[Guest 1]: right, because they
[Guest 1]: have to tell in the morning what happened
[Guest 1]: and they have to do this and that
[Guest 1]: and then there will be a commercial break and 12 songs
[Guest 1]: have to go and talk for 3 minutes
[Guest 1]: you are free to do what you want
[Guest 1]: and I think Sathe is best
[Guest 1]: when he is free to do what he really really
[Guest 1]: wants and in these interviews etc
[Guest 1]: where he is really, really
[Guest 1]: he just comes out so beautifully when you
[Guest 1]: see those episodes and stuff
[Guest 1]: and I really
[Guest 1]: think he should be doing a lot more of it
[Guest 1]: I am sorry by the end of it I think I will take you to bed
[Guest 2]: let's go to the studio, let's do it now
[Guest 2]: coming back to the point that you made and why I want
[Guest 1]: to bring it up, the loneliness bit also
[Guest 2]: loneliness at the top, I think this is an
[Guest 2]: overrated thing, it is the
[Guest 2]: problem of the person who
[Guest 2]: goes to the top that also creates the loneliness
[Guest 2]: and I have seen that
[Guest 2]: with Tendulkar, the friends that he has
[Guest 2]: and he has a lot of friends
[Guest 2]: he has a lot of groups and they have
[Guest 2]: remained faithful not only
[Guest 2]: because he is Tendulkar, it's because of
[Guest 2]: the effort that Tendulkar and his wife have put
[Guest 2]: in those relationships as well, so you
[Guest 2]: will be lonely at the top because you have
[Guest 2]: also chosen to be lonely at the top
[Guest 2]: and it so happens that people who go to the top
[Guest 2]: automatically form an impression of people
[Guest 2]: down below saying that
[Guest 2]: they are fan level and stuff like that
[Guest 2]: they won't resonate with me
[Guest 2]: but in human relations, not everyone is intellectual
[Guest 2]: not everyone plays cricket
[Guest 2]: you and him were friends
[Guest 2]: Tendulkar's every friend from Sahitya Sawas
[Guest 2]: is in touch with him
[Guest 2]: even when he was playing he was on message
[Guest 2]: with all the Sahitya Sawas, the Mumbai Cricket Gang
[Guest 2]: and therefore this
[Guest 2]: proximity to him made me realize that
[Guest 2]: this loneliness at the top is a choice
[Guest 2]: that you make also
[Guest 2]: I mean there are people in your
[Guest 2]: I mean I have spoken to a lot of people
[Guest 2]: at the top and they have said that
[Guest 2]: and I have had this argument with these people
[Guest 2]: that every human being wants to fit his cup
[Guest 2]: because the moment you become a celebrity
[Guest 2]: your friend also gets a little scared
[Guest 2]: of reaching out to you
[Guest 2]: but if he reaches out to you, have you tried to reach out
[Guest 2]: to him again? No you haven't
[Guest 2]: because you become a top guy
[Guest 2]: and you want to now hobnob with all
[Guest 2]: the people who are in that zone
[Guest 2]: you are lonely because you are hobnobing with them
[Guest 2]: and
[Guest 2]: which I have always mentioned to all my creative
[Guest 2]: people and they say you know Mumbai is such
[Guest 2]: a lonely place and this place
[Guest 2]: and that place, I said the problem
[Guest 2]: is that you are looking at transactional relationships
[Guest 2]: if you are looking for friendships
[Guest 2]: in your office which are based
[Guest 2]: on a fundamental of transaction
[Guest 2]: or for that matter if the business community
[Guest 2]: itself, Roshan is meeting 6 clients
[Guest 2]: and he is now one of the clients
[Guest 2]: doesn't reply to his call when he is not
[Guest 2]: feeling well and say this is such a lonely
[Guest 2]: world
[Guest 2]: because in Roshan's mind he is my new friend
[Guest 2]: I drank with him 6 times
[Guest 2]: but he was not your friend
[Guest 2]: so you have started expecting from him
[Guest 2]: and people who go to the top
[Guest 2]: now want those top people
[Guest 2]: to start giving him unconditional love
[Guest 2]: like what his friends did when he was young
[Guest 2]: that is a wrong play
[Guest 2]: and I do believe that
[Guest 2]: if you in that journey of going to the
[Guest 2]: top are going to forget the people who were
[Guest 2]: with you during that process because
[Guest 2]: they are now down market and you are
[Guest 2]: up market now, that is when loneliness
[Guest 2]: at the top happens
[Guest 2]: many people I have seen have managed
[Guest 2]: this because they have just remained
[Guest 2]: normal and Sachin is a great example
[Guest 2]: because he became a prince at 14 and 16
[Guest 2]: so there can't be a bigger
[Guest 2]: celebrity in India during that
[Guest 2]: 24 years and he
[Guest 2]: is in conversation with all the
[Guest 2]: people that he played with
[Guest 2]: in his early years
[Guest 2]: so I think that it is to do
[Guest 2]: a lot with your perspective
[Guest 2]: after you get to the top as well
[Guest 2]: and I have seen a lot of people fail at that level
[Guest 1]: also a lot to do with
[Guest 1]: what world
[Guest 1]: you choose to participate in
[Guest 1]: so Smita Sen had become
[Guest 1]: Miss Universe
[Guest 1]: and then she came and
[Guest 1]: she was Epson's brand ambassador, we were doing a big show
[Guest 1]: when she was 18 I had done
[Guest 1]: something with her as a fashion show in Lucknow
[Guest 1]: which I had hosted over there and I went backstage
[Guest 1]: and for the same TV show I used to do with actors
[Guest 1]: I was backstage and I turned to her
[Guest 1]: and said Sushmita how does it feel like to be in Bombay
[Guest 1]: and now you are part of the film industry
[Guest 1]: and she loves shero shairi
[Guest 1]: and she just turned and said
[Guest 1]: koi haath bhi na milayega jo gale miloge tapak se
[Guest 1]: yeh naye mijaaz ka shehar hai
[Guest 1]: zara faasle se mila karo
[Guest 1]: right
[Guest 1]: so there are very clear
[Guest 1]: cut in this big
[Guest 1]: commercial glamour world of
[Guest 1]: Bollywood and film and all of this etc
[Guest 1]: and success at this level
[Guest 1]: with all the awards and all the A-list that we have
[Guest 1]: there is a lot of these things that people
[Guest 1]: have to do, there is a machinery
[Guest 1]: the machinery around a star today sometimes
[Guest 1]: if a star does a show for you for free
[Guest 1]: I had a very dear friend of mine who was doing one
[Guest 1]: Kukri show and something and she invited some
[Guest 1]: very big celebrity who was a friend of hers
[Guest 1]: who used to be at her house and whatever
[Guest 1]: and she said that you know
[Guest 1]: of course I won't charge you and came
[Guest 1]: the entourage cost
[Guest 1]: was so more than the cost of the show
[Guest 1]: I am sorry I can't afford these people
[Guest 1]: so people build these
[Guest 1]: machineries around themselves
[Guest 1]: and this becomes
[Guest 1]: more and more lonely because
[Guest 1]: even this set of people keeps people away
[Guest 1]: very often there is a set of people
[Guest 1]: who now feel that because they have
[Guest 1]: access and access means money
[Guest 1]: access means power, they will
[Guest 1]: take off the access of everyone else
[Guest 1]: there was a newspaper
[Guest 1]: a TV journalist when Jeena Icy Ka Naam
[Guest 1]: used to happen and a friend of mine was working
[Guest 1]: on the show as a producer and
[Guest 1]: Akshay was in fact doing that episode and
[Guest 1]: the person who had coordinated
[Guest 1]: the interview, this journalist
[Guest 1]: said that Akshay is not coming just now
[Guest 1]: and whatever
[Guest 1]: so the producer got very upset
[Guest 1]: saying what happened?
[Guest 1]: won't come, won't come
[Guest 1]: so after about an hour of saying the person still
[Guest 1]: not coming or blah blah blah this producer
[Guest 1]: went opened the vanity van door and said I am just
[Guest 1]: walking in and sitting inside
[Guest 1]: was Akshay saying that when are we starting
[Guest 1]: she said we have been ready
[Guest 1]: for the last hour, no one told me
[Guest 1]: right
[Guest 1]: and then the famous
[Guest 1]: statement again and sometimes people say this
[Guest 1]: when I was trying to cast him off
[Guest 1]: I couldn't get access because I was being blocked
[Guest 1]: and he turned and said Roshan this city
[Guest 1]: is such that sometimes
[Guest 1]: more than tea
[Guest 1]: the plate gets hot
[Guest 1]: right so people
[Guest 1]: build these things, they build this
[Guest 2]: area
[Guest 2]: see this emotional thing
[Guest 2]: gets glamorized
[Guest 2]: but it is not like that because I tell a lot of
[Guest 2]: young cricketers that
[Guest 2]: your journey
[Guest 2]: you have reached from here to here
[Guest 2]: your job is to make a relationship
[Guest 2]: this is not the job of people
[Guest 2]: and if you don't make an effort to make a relationship
[Guest 2]: then the people
[Guest 2]: around you will become your friends
[Guest 2]: that is a wrong premise
[Guest 2]: the people around you are your
[Guest 2]: protective cover, they are not your friends
[Guest 2]: but they will
[Guest 2]: stop you from calling your friends
[Guest 2]: you should understand
[Guest 1]: that friends are important for you
[Guest 1]: and which world do you choose, like you said
[Guest 1]: high babes world or
[Guest 2]: I am happy doing my art concert
[Guest 2]: choose both but
[Guest 2]: your onus is to call
[Guest 2]: you have grown up
[Guest 2]: no matter how much you
[Guest 2]: shirk the responsibility
[Guest 2]: it is so lonely at the top
[Guest 2]: it is all fake relationship
[Guest 2]: how much have you tried?
[Guest 2]: because I have become important
[Guest 2]: I don't call people, people have to call me
[Guest 2]: I think I have seen that with a lot of young cricketers
[Guest 2]: also that the moment they
[Guest 2]: leave their small town and come into
[Guest 2]: this world where everybody is
[Guest 2]: they are also looking at
[Guest 2]: if I meet Vikram Sathe, he will do a sponsorship deal
[Guest 2]: if I come to his show, I will have 10 followers
[Guest 2]: and I will get a city bank deal
[Guest 2]: if your lens becomes like this
[Guest 2]: then that guy in the village becomes
[Amit Varma]: immaterial. So I have a follow up question
[Amit Varma]: two angles to it, one is
[Amit Varma]: I had done an episode with Harsha Bhogle
[Unknown]: a long long time back, it was a very short episode
[Unknown]: it was just an hour
[Amit Varma]: but one interesting point he made there
[Amit Varma]: was that that generation
[Amit Varma]: which you spoke of, Sachin, Ravid,
[Amit Varma]: Kumle, all of those guys, they had a solid
[Amit Varma]: middle class background with middle class values
[Amit Varma]: which he said played a part in making them
[Amit Varma]: who they are. For example,
[Amit Varma]: you know my speculation about all the great Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: talent that used to come up
[Amit Varma]: like every year there would be a new 19
[Amit Varma]: year old blazing his way
[Amit Varma]: forward and in one year he would just be gone
[Amit Varma]: and one possible factor for that
[Amit Varma]: was that there was at that time
[Amit Varma]: I don't know about now, at that time, no real middle class
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan. So many of these would be
[Amit Varma]: small town kids who have come up and who simply
[Amit Varma]: cannot handle the fame and the money
[Amit Varma]: and they kind of fall apart
[Amit Varma]: and what has happened since in Indian
[Amit Varma]: cricket and it's a damn good thing that it's happened
[Amit Varma]: that small town India
[Amit Varma]: has really asserted itself that
[Amit Varma]: players can come from anywhere, perhaps starting
[Amit Varma]: with the Dhoni Yuvraj generation
[Amit Varma]: but small town has kind of taken over
[Amit Varma]: and you have people from many different backgrounds
[Amit Varma]: which is wonderful
[Amit Varma]: but it means that the sort of, you know
[Amit Varma]: even if Sachin, Ravid, Kumle were
[Amit Varma]: from different cities
[Amit Varma]: it was homogenous in terms of those
[Amit Varma]: middle class values
[Amit Varma]: which means that you are much more
[Amit Varma]: settled and you don't
[Amit Varma]: go through those experiences and the second angle
[Amit Varma]: is coming to a city, right
[Amit Varma]: when you speak about Sachin, sure he
[Amit Varma]: became a big star very early but he was
[Amit Varma]: already part of what seems
[Amit Varma]: to me to be part of a really settled
[Amit Varma]: community that Bandra East
[Amit Varma]: you know, Saikar, Sivas or whatever
[Amit Varma]: that community of artists and
[Amit Varma]: cultured people and whatever and you're part
[Amit Varma]: of that where nobody gets too big for their boots
[Amit Varma]: as that, you know, again the classic
[Amit Varma]: middle class Maharashtrian mentality even if
[Amit Varma]: in terms of income you break out of that
[Amit Varma]: and that sense of community is there
[Amit Varma]: but for a lot of people who
[Amit Varma]: come to Bombay, including me when I first came
[Amit Varma]: to Bombay, you are atomized
[Amit Varma]: you know, there is no community
[Amit Varma]: everything initially is transactional
[Amit Varma]: you have no friends, it's atomized
[Amit Varma]: everything is transactional
[Amit Varma]: maybe over a period of time you build a community
[Amit Varma]: of friends, maybe you don't but if
[Amit Varma]: you've come from a small town somewhere
[Amit Varma]: and you're thrust into the spotlight like this
[Amit Varma]: to say that loneliness
[Amit Varma]: is a choice, I don't think it's completely
[Amit Varma]: fair in those cases because
[Amit Varma]: you don't even know, you know, at the one hand
[Amit Varma]: you might be mixing with the babes, dudes kind
[Amit Varma]: of thing and saying, I don't belong here
[Amit Varma]: which is actually a better thing to say to yourself
[Amit Varma]: than trying artificially to fit in
[Amit Varma]: and on the other side
[Amit Varma]: you no longer have any common
[Amit Varma]: thread that connects you with whoever
[Amit Varma]: you might have known in your hometown
[Amit Varma]: back there, it just feels very awkward
[Amit Varma]: on both sides
[Guest 2]: and those kind of frames. So there are some
[Guest 2]: people who do it well, like MS did
[Guest 2]: it very well. So what they do
[Guest 2]: is that they involve all
[Guest 2]: their friends in business
[Unknown]: in their own company
[Guest 1]: which is also not the right thing to do
[Guest 2]: which is not the right thing to do but everybody
[Guest 2]: see, it's not left or right
[Guest 2]: it's not right or right, the answer is
[Guest 2]: somewhere in the center. But they
[Guest 2]: have tried in such a way that my
[Guest 2]: 4-5 people who
[Guest 2]: make me stay in my life
[Guest 2]: I will involve them because I am
[Guest 2]: travelling around. So you will always have
[Guest 2]: some people find a balance with 3-4
[Guest 2]: people travelling with them or being with them
[Guest 2]: MS after he
[Unknown]: finishes his cricket, he is not in
[Guest 2]: any party, he is in Ranchi with his
[Guest 2]: friends, in his old this thing
[Guest 2]: but they are in touch with him regularly
[Guest 2]: so the fact of the matter is
[Guest 2]: MS Dhoni is not lonely at all
[Guest 2]: so people
[Guest 2]: coming from small towns have
[Guest 2]: cracked it because Dhoni for whatever it's worth
[Guest 2]: also is a very smart guy but maybe
[Guest 2]: you would not have an Umran Malik get this kind
[Guest 2]: of education, maybe you would not have a
[Guest 2]: Kuldeep Yadav get this kind of education
[Guest 2]: but is there a system
[Guest 2]: which tells a Kuldeep Yadav that
[Guest 2]: you are on the fast path, don't forget
[Guest 2]: your friends because
[Guest 2]: they will keep you on the same level
[Guest 2]: this has to come in your primary education
[Guest 2]: or this has to come in your family
[Guest 2]: value system and those
[Guest 2]: who are able to crack that
[Guest 2]: don't suffer loneliness at the
[Guest 2]: top but if you leave all of that
[Guest 2]: behind and it's not necessary that they have to travel
[Guest 2]: with you, there is a phone and you can be in
[Guest 2]: touch with them and many cricketers do that on a
[Guest 2]: regular basis but the moment
[Guest 2]: you try and cross the boundary and
[Guest 2]: say that I want to be friends with the Juhu boys
[Guest 2]: or for that matter the Bandra boys
[Guest 2]: that becomes a problem
[Guest 2]: okay and
[Guest 2]: if you keep the balance that
[Guest 2]: these are important people to know but
[Guest 2]: I come back to my own point which Dhoni
[Guest 2]: did beautifully
[Guest 2]: Dhoni never involves himself in
[Guest 2]: he doesn't meet big people
[Guest 2]: he is back to Rachi and
[Guest 2]: farming, play MS Dhoni
[Guest 2]: the legend, go back to Rachi
[Guest 2]: do 5 shoots in Bombay
[Guest 2]: even for us we know him for
[Guest 2]: so many years, he will not meet more than once
[Guest 2]: how are you Vikram bhai?
[Guest 2]: 3-4 jokes, never will he make an
[Guest 2]: attempt, he doesn't carry a phone so there is
[Guest 2]: a great example for somebody who has kept
[Guest 2]: the balance of being in a
[Guest 2]: party in Bandra and being in a shoot
[Guest 2]: go back to his hometown with his 6
[Guest 2]: friends, so it can be done
[Guest 2]: only thing is that he is an evolved person
[Guest 2]: he understood it quickly
[Guest 2]: small kids may not be able to understand
[Guest 2]: so how can he be explained
[Guest 2]: is the challenge but education
[Guest 2]: has to be done to make them understand
[Guest 2]: that boss the story is not to find
[Guest 2]: friendships in transactions
[Guest 2]: and this is a question I would like to ask you
[Guest 2]: also that in a city like Mumbai
[Guest 2]: where everybody has come for a
[Guest 2]: transaction, to seek friendships
[Guest 2]: in a pond which is
[Guest 2]: transactional and then hope
[Guest 2]: that it will give you unconditional love
[Guest 2]: is also a challenge
[Guest 2]: but see that's what I am saying
[Guest 2]: and I am not saying that nothing can be done
[Guest 2]: transactional relationship also can be nutritious
[Guest 1]: but still it is
[Guest 1]: absolutely, I am just answering
[Guest 1]: what you are saying
[Guest 1]: when you come to, if you think
[Guest 1]: that because this is a city where ok
[Guest 1]: city of dreams, dreams get fulfilled
[Guest 1]: head of business and Bollywood both exist here
[Guest 1]: whatever and therefore you will possibly find
[Guest 1]: the top layer of
[Guest 1]: stuff in this
[Guest 1]: I feel that if you are going to
[Guest 1]: come here saying this is a city of transactions
[Guest 1]: then you will make transactional relationships
[Guest 1]: but if genuinely when I
[Guest 1]: came to Mumbai, I came to Mumbai chasing
[Guest 1]: Shaheen because you know she was here
[Guest 1]: and I was like ok I will get work
[Guest 1]: I didn't chase opportunity and again
[Guest 1]: I am not saying that, there are many and I can tell you a lot of
[Guest 1]: young people today are not like this
[Guest 1]: they are not, there is a set of people
[Guest 1]: and I genuinely believe in them
[Guest 1]: the young creators, I call them this really
[Guest 1]: the unafraid generation
[Guest 1]: they are unafraid, I know
[Guest 1]: the word flawsome, I am
[Amit Varma]: flawed but I am awesome
[Amit Varma]: first time I have heard the word, it's a nice word
[Guest 1]: so I use this very often
[Guest 1]: so I turn and say this is generation flawsome
[Guest 1]: they are very happy to own up to this
[Guest 1]: they are very happy to have conversations
[Guest 1]: beyond the transaction
[Guest 1]: and frankly in any relationship
[Guest 1]: if you and I came and we were
[Guest 1]: supposed to discuss, Amit can you do this podcast
[Guest 1]: for me and that is the transaction over
[Guest 1]: but I have a remaining half an hour
[Guest 1]: that I want to get to know Amit
[Guest 1]: and find that there are places of commonality
[Guest 1]: they will happen
[Guest 1]: you will find that common
[Guest 1]: relevant thing that will happen
[Guest 1]: I made a film, I am not in touch with 89%
[Guest 1]: of the people there, but there are 10%
[Guest 1]: people that I am still in touch with, not because of
[Guest 1]: transaction, but because there was a common
[Guest 1]: something that we shared
[Guest 1]: I just did the play Namit Das
[Guest 1]: I just discovered Namit, what a great singer
[Guest 1]: what a great performer
[Guest 1]: one day he was sitting and he started telling me a story that was in his head
[Guest 1]: loves cricket, has played cricket
[Guest 1]: now that's there
[Guest 1]: Sagar Deshmukh is a brilliant
[Guest 1]: actor from the Marathi stage
[Guest 1]: played Ambedkar on the television show for 2 years
[Guest 1]: learned something with him
[Guest 1]: a new relationship was formed
[Guest 1]: so what are you looking for
[Guest 1]: that is it
[Guest 1]: and I know that sometimes at a young age
[Guest 1]: you might be wanting this thing of saying
[Guest 1]: oh I need to quickly reach to the top
[Guest 1]: fastest transactional path
[Guest 1]: but genuinely I find a lot of
[Guest 1]: young people while they are aware of this
[Guest 1]: suddenly, see
[Guest 1]: remember what we were taught at that point in time was just work
[Guest 1]: work work because the time to enjoy will come later
[Guest 1]: some of us chose not to do that
[Guest 1]: but I find a lot of the younger lot
[Guest 1]: because of this whole work
[Guest 1]: life, you know what is my balance
[Guest 1]: mental health
[Guest 1]: breaking down
[Guest 1]: my daughter is 15
[Guest 1]: yes I mean fine, my children come from a
[Guest 1]: privileged background now
[Guest 1]: but I find them to be
[Guest 1]: about a lot of these things which
[Guest 1]: normally I feel
[Guest 1]: they are happy
[Guest 1]: enjoying certain aspects of life
[Guest 1]: gap years have become such a common
[Guest 1]: thing, earlier gap years used to be a slur
[Guest 1]: remember, oh my god they took a gap year
[Guest 1]: now taking a gap year is
[Guest 1]: like an international thing of I want to go and discover the world
[Guest 1]: I want to go and find things
[Guest 1]: being a digital nomad
[Guest 1]: not wanting to own a house, not wanting to have a car
[Guest 1]: I think a lot
[Guest 1]: of this is breaking down
[Guest 1]: maybe a lot of it has to do with this new generation
[Guest 1]: and of course we live in a multitude
[Guest 1]: of India's as well
[Guest 1]: so when you go to a smaller city it's a very different thing
[Guest 1]: you go to an industrial
[Guest 1]: town, people behave very differently
[Guest 1]: you talk to a business community
[Guest 1]: but I mean in all of this I am very happy
[Guest 1]: that I largely exist within the creator subset
[Guest 1]: and I really find young creators
[Guest 1]: are now in this
[Guest 1]: you know, flawsome, honest
[Guest 1]: space of ownership
[Amit Varma]: which I personally really love
[Amit Varma]: so I have a broader question for both of you
[Amit Varma]: which you know ties in
[Amit Varma]: different threads of what we were talking about
[Amit Varma]: like earlier you mentioned Vikram that you were at this
[Amit Varma]: event where they wanted victory
[Amit Varma]: they were negotiating, right, how to
[Amit Varma]: fit Papplu, transactional mindset and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth
[Amit Varma]: and while a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: I imagine who would be successful today
[Amit Varma]: in my mind whenever I meet a successful
[Amit Varma]: person like Roshan
[Amit Varma]: I find them to be very humble and open
[Amit Varma]: completely different from this where their norms are
[Amit Varma]: that I will be warm, I will be whatever
[Amit Varma]: and Papplu fit doesn't matter to me
[Amit Varma]: and it seems
[Amit Varma]: that there is a difference in norms here
[Amit Varma]: another place in which there is a difference in norms
[Amit Varma]: here is the Bollywood example you give
[Amit Varma]: where the actress tells you that
[Amit Varma]: I have to throw tantrum on the first day
[Amit Varma]: because of this
[Amit Varma]: and they are all responding to
[Amit Varma]: rational incentives
[Amit Varma]: she gave you a rational reason, these are the incentives
[Amit Varma]: that need to be taken seriously
[Amit Varma]: so therefore on the first day I have to do this
[Amit Varma]: you know, the people who were in that
[Amit Varma]: meeting who said boss, victory
[Amit Varma]: I love the way you said that
[Amit Varma]: you know, they are also responding to incentives
[Amit Varma]: and I remember something that Jagdish
[Amit Varma]: Bhagwati said a while back where he said that
[Amit Varma]: India has a rent seeking mindset
[Amit Varma]: China has a profit seeking mindset
[Amit Varma]: now I don't know how true this is of China
[Amit Varma]: but with India their rent seeking mindset
[Amit Varma]: has certainly been there because
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people I used to meet
[Amit Varma]: who would talk of business or talk of whatever
[Amit Varma]: were always looking for ways
[Amit Varma]: in which they make someone a fool
[Amit Varma]: you know, let's take advantage of someone
[Amit Varma]: which is a rent seeking mindset
[Guest 2]: and is complete nonsense
[Amit Varma]: but this is what also this was
[Amit Varma]: in a sense
[Amit Varma]: so my theory of that is
[Amit Varma]: that it is not that a
[Amit Varma]: cultural norm comes out of
[Amit Varma]: culture itself per se
[Amit Varma]: but it is part of a feedback loop
[Amit Varma]: with the institutions that exist
[Amit Varma]: because since independence we were so
[Amit Varma]: statist that the only way
[Amit Varma]: for decades that you could make money
[Amit Varma]: was either if you were part of the state
[Amit Varma]: or if you could use state power to
[Amit Varma]: you know, be a crony capitalist or whatever
[Amit Varma]: but basically use other people's power
[Amit Varma]: and earn rent that way
[Amit Varma]: that brought about the rent seeking mindset
[Amit Varma]: scarcity economy, no one has anything
[Amit Varma]: you know, double thank you moments
[Amit Varma]: in that sense are not conceivable if you don't have
[Amit Varma]: a free market, so what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: whereas from that
[Amit Varma]: after 91 perhaps over the decades
[Amit Varma]: we evolved to the situation
[Amit Varma]: where today the best way to make money is you make
[Amit Varma]: somebody else better off, positive
[Amit Varma]: some game, you win, I win, double thank you moment
[Amit Varma]: right, so do you
[Amit Varma]: sense a shift in mindsets
[Amit Varma]: from the Pablu setting
[Amit Varma]: rent seeking mindset to something better
[Amit Varma]: and even in terms of
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood, like I'm just wondering, you know we talk
[Amit Varma]: a lot about cultural norms
[Amit Varma]: and we think of it almost as in terms of
[Amit Varma]: hum toh aise hi hai
[Amit Varma]: and I don't buy that completely
[Amit Varma]: I don't think that a cultural
[Amit Varma]: norm is purely cultural
[Amit Varma]: and I don't think that, you know, when you say
[Amit Varma]: young people are like this today, I don't
[Amit Varma]: think that it's young people are like this
[Amit Varma]: today only, I think the environment
[Guest 2]: the incentives they are responding to plays a big
[Guest 2]: part
[Guest 2]: So, you know, Roshan, you would be in better
[Guest 2]: position to answer this but generally
[Guest 2]: about culture, you know, behavioral
[Guest 2]: change takes a long time
[Guest 2]: to set in but I have seen in certain
[Guest 2]: organizations, come back to MTV right
[Guest 2]: that if the organization
[Guest 2]: has a cultural point, at
[Guest 2]: least you know that there is a cultural change
[Guest 2]: in that organization and when you say creative
[Guest 2]: people, the young creative people
[Guest 2]: and your observation, I would like to believe that
[Guest 2]: a large part of them are working in the
[Guest 2]: organization culture that you have set in
[Guest 2]: which is at Commune, like in MTV
[Guest 2]: the game changing moment for me
[Guest 2]: to come out with my creative thoughts
[Guest 2]: was there was this beautiful philosophy
[Guest 2]: set by MTV US which
[Guest 2]: was based on the principle of WQ
[Guest 2]: which is Wackiness Quotient
[Guest 2]: so the whole principle
[Guest 2]: was any communication that goes from the
[Guest 2]: marketing department, creative department, whichever
[Guest 2]: has to have a WQ
[Guest 2]: so even if you were making a
[Guest 2]: merchandise in form of
[Guest 2]: a cup, you wanted to see how
[Guest 2]: creative it was, that was a cultural
[Guest 2]: value which meant that even the
[Guest 2]: finance guy, the accountant who is going to
[Guest 2]: give you your salary has to do it
[Guest 2]: in a Wackiness Quotient manner
[Guest 2]: and I think that cultural value
[Guest 2]: set the cultural tone of music
[Guest 2]: television and therefore the creativity flourished
[Guest 2]: at a country level
[Guest 2]: is there a cultural value that can
[Guest 2]: be set in is a big challenge
[Guest 2]: and therefore when you say have things changed
[Guest 2]: maybe in certain places
[Guest 2]: where there has been an active
[Guest 2]: role played by a certain senior
[Guest 2]: member of the organization or for that matter
[Guest 2]: that milieu that you know
[Guest 2]: we want people to do this
[Guest 2]: and therefore like you know there is this beautiful example
[Guest 2]: that happened in Sweden
[Guest 2]: where they said that we want to inculcate
[Guest 2]: the habit of exercising
[Guest 2]: on the go
[Guest 2]: and therefore they created this
[Guest 2]: escalator and then next to
[Guest 2]: the escalator there were normal stairs
[Guest 2]: which were designed in the form of
[Unknown]: a piano and every time you
[Guest 2]: stepped on the first step, there was a different
[Guest 2]: sound and they realized that 50%
[Guest 2]: of people using escalators
[Guest 2]: had shifted too, so the visual cues
[Guest 2]: were so strong in order to create
[Guest 2]: a cultural value to exercise
[Guest 2]: and I thought that was a great example
[Guest 2]: we do it in one of the companies that I have invested
[Guest 2]: in, we are trying to see if
[Guest 2]: cafeterias in offices
[Guest 2]: can be designed in such a way that
[Guest 2]: the first thing you see is protein and
[Guest 2]: water, so even if you have to
[Guest 2]: go to the vada pav, you have to ensure
[Guest 2]: that you are crossing the visual
[Guest 2]: cues of having water
[Guest 2]: having the protein and then going into
[Guest 1]: carbohydrates in order to create that
[Guest 1]: thing. This is in that book, you know
[Guest 1]: where they actually change the entire
[Guest 1]: order of shelves.
[Amit Varma]: Nudge would have things about it.
[Amit Varma]: It is in nudge and whatever.
[Guest 2]: Nudge can be taken too far but these
[Guest 2]: are great examples, I totally approve.
[Guest 2]: So the thing is that this can be created
[Guest 2]: but the behavioral change with all these
[Guest 2]: visual cues, cumulatively
[Guest 2]: in an entire generation,
[Guest 2]: how they should be done, like you know for me
[Guest 2]: this world cup, the winner is
[Unknown]: Japan. Oh yeah.
[Guest 2]: I mean if the Japanese have
[Guest 2]: built one value in this world
[Guest 1]: today has been when the Japanese fans
[Guest 1]: clean the stadium
[Guest 2]: before they left and then
[Guest 2]: the PR happened on the players after
[Guest 2]: they left the dressing room.
[Guest 2]: That was completely clean. To me
[Guest 2]: a big and then
[Guest 2]: what happened in the next game, Saudi Arabia
[Guest 2]: people cleaned the stadium after.
[Guest 2]: This is the greatest example set
[Guest 2]: by behavioral change
[Guest 2]: by a team which is so
[Guest 2]: influential today because of the kind of
[Guest 2]: football also they are playing and I think
[Guest 2]: if something of that nature happens
[Guest 2]: in society, I think
[Guest 2]: we will also move delta.
[Guest 2]: Whether that's happening at a large youth
[Guest 2]: level, I do not know but
[Guest 2]: I think it is happening at an organizational
[Guest 1]: level. No, I definitely think
[Guest 1]: that you know I mean yes at
[Guest 1]: Commune we do practice that kind
[Guest 1]: of mindfulness etc but I notice it even
[Guest 1]: outside. You do. Right and
[Guest 1]: today there will be
[Guest 1]: young people who will be part of your organization
[Guest 1]: and remember on the group I would often use this word guys
[Guest 1]: right guys can you do this?
[Guest 1]: So one day you know this
[Guest 1]: person said that you know
[Guest 1]: I'd appreciate if you actually were a little more
[Guest 1]: conscious of the fact that the team has
[Guest 1]: people who might be gender fluid and people who
[Guest 1]: you know have not you know
[Guest 1]: would prefer if they referred to you referred
[Guest 1]: to everybody from a different thing
[Guest 1]: and the entire team
[Guest 1]: appreciated it. I mean we all actually sat and when
[Guest 1]: I am now conscious of this or whatever. Now
[Guest 1]: sometimes you are taking things too far
[Guest 1]: whatever. Hard discussions sometimes
[Guest 1]: on these things. They
[Guest 1]: are unafraid to say it.
[Guest 1]: Now will everybody accept it
[Guest 1]: at large? As you said this is a great example that you
[Guest 1]: gave about you know what's happening in football right now
[Guest 1]: today there was a thing that when they
[Guest 1]: Japan lost the manager
[Guest 1]: was standing there and bowing to all the fans
[Guest 1]: and I mean it's beautiful or
[Guest 1]: the Brazilian team
[Guest 1]: guy hugging because his teammates with
[Guest 1]: the rival team is the South Korean
[Guest 1]: player and hugging him and saying that you know you gave your professional
[Guest 1]: best and I did. I
[Guest 1]: really it is these things that need to
[Guest 1]: be celebrated a lot more.
[Guest 1]: Somewhere I feel
[Guest 1]: that we have also
[Guest 1]: started in some
[Guest 1]: bits like when roadies started happening I was
[Guest 1]: a little scared. Because
[Guest 1]: you somewhere
[Guest 1]: when in Big Boss or roadies
[Guest 1]: you bring in people
[Guest 1]: and characters where you are celebrating
[Guest 1]: the lowest common denominator
[Guest 1]: not the highest common factor. You
[Guest 1]: are doing it for TRP etc.
[Guest 1]: But believe you me
[Guest 1]: you are setting a bad precedent.
[Guest 1]: To give you an example on the other
[Guest 1]: side a boy used to work with me
[Guest 1]: my content team and he was on the train going
[Guest 1]: to Lucknow and he came back and said I've got to
[Guest 1]: tell you the most brilliant thing. So what?
[Guest 1]: He said that
[Guest 1]: we were sitting in the train and suddenly
[Guest 1]: you know his phone was borrowed
[Guest 1]: by the other person because
[Guest 1]: he wanted to use the internet.
[Guest 1]: He said use this phone. He had two phones.
[Guest 1]: I said why two phones?
[Guest 1]: He said my parents also use this phone.
[Guest 1]: I said
[Guest 1]: do I watch MX on this?
[Guest 1]: Right? And sometimes
[Guest 1]: there is a channel of Balaji
[Guest 1]: which has some adult content. I watch that
[Guest 1]: but I keep this for my parents.
[Guest 1]: India most
[Guest 1]: young people everybody still
[Guest 1]: has this sense which is
[Guest 1]: why a Panchayat works.
[Guest 1]: Which is why you know a Gullak works
[Guest 1]: a Tathastu works at one
[Guest 1]: level and we just
[Guest 1]: need to learn to celebrate it a lot more.
[Guest 1]: It's not that just the
[Guest 1]: fine the blood and gore in a Mirzapur
[Guest 1]: suddenly shocks you. But then it
[Guest 1]: becomes that everyone wants to do that. You know like
[Guest 1]: if you go to a OTT today to say
[Guest 1]: what do you want to see?
[Guest 1]: For two years ago I remember when we used to have meetings
[Guest 1]: all discussions were boss
[Guest 1]: you know sex, crime, murder
[Guest 1]: extramarital affair.
[Guest 1]: What are you saying?
[Guest 1]: But there is a bunch of people who went
[Guest 1]: back and said no we will keep bringing different things
[Guest 1]: and they have created
[Guest 1]: that space.
[Guest 1]: So somewhere I do feel
[Guest 1]: that this is a lot
[Guest 1]: about I believe that this generation
[Guest 1]: is very very different. I think one of the big
[Guest 1]: things is remember that most of the people are born with
[Guest 1]: the internet. They have been born
[Guest 1]: with a window to many worlds.
[Guest 1]: We had a window to either
[Guest 1]: our neighbors or our parents.
[Guest 1]: Parents told us
[Guest 1]: those values.
[Guest 1]: College or school or whatever.
[Guest 1]: They have a million words.
[Guest 1]: I can't stop my daughter from watching Euphoria
[Guest 1]: which I am very scared that
[Guest 1]: a 14 year old girl saw. What is Euphoria?
[Guest 1]: So Euphoria is this show on Netflix
[Guest 1]: which actually if you see had
[Guest 1]: themes that were very extreme.
[Guest 1]: You know so an underage person
[Guest 1]: having an affair with a married man or whatever
[Guest 1]: because of a dating thing that happens.
[Guest 1]: Drug use etc. Casual
[Guest 1]: sex. Now
[Guest 1]: as a parent there was this big thing. But I
[Guest 1]: also know that at the same time she has
[Guest 1]: a set of values which she has been brought up with.
[Guest 1]: There are conversations.
[Guest 1]: My daughter can sit with me and have conversations
[Guest 1]: on topics that she could. I can't
[Guest 1]: believe my sister could have ever had with my father.
[Guest 1]: And we have them. Sometimes
[Guest 1]: it is to me a little difficult.
[Guest 1]: And I will tell Shaheen to sit and
[Guest 1]: say listen can you have this chat with her
[Guest 1]: or whatever. I have to say Abba you are giving me
[Guest 1]: that dad look. You know
[Guest 1]: if she is dressing up or whatever and she is going
[Guest 1]: out. Now she is at that age.
[Guest 1]: There will be boys. There will be discovery.
[Guest 1]: But you know
[Guest 1]: as long as there are these
[Guest 1]: multiple windows open. My
[Guest 1]: fear is when the
[Guest 1]: single window becomes that one window
[Guest 1]: which everybody is celebrating which becomes
[Guest 1]: the fad of the moment.
[Guest 1]: And 90% of fads as you
[Guest 1]: know are the negative fads are what algorithms
[Guest 1]: pick up and put out because shock
[Guest 1]: gets a lot more response. We react a lot
[Guest 1]: faster. But
[Guest 1]: somewhere when I see
[Guest 1]: the better India story coming up on my
[Guest 1]: feed I am a lot more happier saying
[Guest 1]: this also comes. Or
[Guest 1]: when I see the work that Yuva does. Nikhil was on your
[Guest 1]: podcast or whatever. I am happy
[Guest 1]: that there are
[Guest 2]: channels like that as well which
[Guest 2]: are giving that. Absolutely. And I think what
[Guest 2]: Roshan you are saying is something that I have been saying
[Guest 2]: to a lot of people because human beings
[Guest 2]: are wired for negative right.
[Guest 2]: You have 100 good things people say
[Guest 2]: to you on social media but one guy abuses
[Guest 2]: you. You live with that and that will
[Guest 2]: depress you. And the only way
[Guest 2]: to cure bad content is to make
[Unknown]: good content. Yeah. There is no
[Unknown]: other way out. How else? And that's why
[Guest 2]: this whole thing that you don't make this
[Guest 2]: you don't make that. That is not under our control.
[Guest 2]: Make good content
[Guest 2]: so that if 5 out of 100 people
[Guest 2]: shift here you have created
[Guest 2]: a movement. So that is why
[Guest 2]: as a principal on social media
[Guest 2]: I do not write anything negative.
[Guest 2]: I do not reply. I will just see
[Guest 2]: when you say good things that
[Guest 2]: these guys have done good work you might get one
[Unknown]: retweet. If you just one
[Guest 2]: abuse you will get thousands. So your fan
[Guest 2]: following which is a trap is going to make
[Guest 2]: you say negative things. But as a
[Guest 2]: principal if we are all in it
[Guest 2]: together we have to ensure that
[Guest 2]: the only way to break down negativity
[Guest 2]: is to say hey this guy did this. Amit's
[Guest 2]: podcast is very good. Roshan is doing this thing
[Guest 2]: because even positivity
[Guest 2]: now that time has come
[Guest 2]: that if you give positive to the public
[Guest 2]: then they can be addicted to positive as well.
[Guest 2]: And I think that is the journey we all are
[Amit Varma]: probably taking in our own lives. I think what I have kind of noticed
[Amit Varma]: is if you look at the sort of virality
[Amit Varma]: that happens. It is really
[Amit Varma]: shitting on other people. Because here is the thing
[Amit Varma]: if I am on Twitter and I
[Amit Varma]: co-tweet you and I say something rude about you
[Amit Varma]: something I would never do in real life but Twitter
[Amit Varma]: makes it easy. Then what happens is
[Amit Varma]: by standing in judgment over somebody
[Amit Varma]: else I have made myself
[Amit Varma]: feel more knowledgeable and virtuous.
[Amit Varma]: And within my tribe if that other
[Amit Varma]: person is hated then my status
[Guest 2]: also goes up a little bit. Because if
[Guest 2]: someone abuses you and I
[Guest 2]: say Roshan is my friend and Roshan has given
[Guest 2]: an abuse to you. We both are like
[Guest 2]: Amit ki bajadi. So I
[Guest 2]: am getting a dopamine rush
[Guest 2]: because this guy
[Guest 2]: has said something to you on Twitter. Now that's
[Guest 2]: dangerous. Because what I am creating
[Guest 2]: is there are billions of people like this
[Guest 2]: abusing billions of people and
[Guest 2]: they are getting a rush out of it. And
[Amit Varma]: that is a monster you cannot control.
[Amit Varma]: This is amplified at scale. In fact I wrote
[Amit Varma]: a recent post about how Twitter could change for the
[Amit Varma]: better and you know these incentives
[Amit Varma]: I think can be changed. It's a structural
[Amit Varma]: thing within Twitter that it's just
[Amit Varma]: I mean they are trying to maximize engagement
[Guest 2]: but it's kind of just
[Guest 2]: I mean I said
[Guest 2]: this to my friend that if
[Guest 2]: Elon Musk really is serious he should make sure
[Guest 2]: that after every thousand
[Guest 2]: tweet, positive tweet, only
[Guest 2]: those will get verified.
[Guest 2]: In the sense
[Guest 2]: that you are at least saying that we are
[Guest 2]: using it more as an educational
[Guest 2]: or you know unifying medium
[Guest 2]: rather than all the negativity. But that's
[Guest 1]: I mean it's just a joke. No no you know and see
[Guest 1]: what happens. Look at this thing is that
[Guest 1]: that the half-life of social
[Guest 1]: mediums is
[Guest 1]: decreasing as we go along.
[Guest 1]: Facebook lasted for a long period
[Guest 1]: of time. Then comes an Instagram
[Guest 1]: little you know I mean it's there but again
[Guest 1]: you can now see that certain parts of it are crumbling.
[Guest 1]: WhatsApp etc. TikTok. Now
[Guest 1]: there's this new thing which these
[Guest 1]: young kids are using where you just
[Guest 1]: take a picture once a day.
[Guest 1]: Right. I'm just forgetting the name of the app. I'll try
[Guest 1]: Not Snapchat or something. No no no.
[Guest 1]: So there's something new. Is it called
[Guest 1]: BU or something or whatever. It's just
[Guest 1]: once a day you got to post a picture and it
[Guest 1]: posts a picture of both sides. You
[Guest 1]: and what you're seeing. Because
[Guest 1]: they're saying over feeding
[Guest 1]: is not going to work.
[Guest 1]: You don't need to constantly fall
[Guest 1]: trapped. So they are themselves reacting
[Guest 1]: to it. They are building their own
[Guest 1]: networks and these new networks
[Guest 1]: will continue to happen. Everybody
[Guest 1]: the minute Twitter started people started
[Guest 1]: worrying about Twitter dying. Everybody
[Guest 1]: started talking about this new network which is an
[Guest 1]: online server based kind of network
[Guest 1]: or whatever. People
[Guest 1]: are making those choices.
[Guest 1]: It's just that you do not get
[Guest 1]: Twitch for example for gamers.
[Guest 1]: We'll be here.
[Guest 1]: Now in I mean
[Guest 1]: you know dating app started or whatever
[Guest 1]: Tinder etc. Oh this is too male centric
[Guest 1]: blah blah blah. So for people who want
[Guest 1]: to choose there is Grindr, there is Hinge, there is
[Guest 1]: so and so, there is Bumble. I mean
[Guest 1]: people will keep creating
[Guest 1]: new ways. It's a matter of
[Guest 1]: where people are going to move.
[Amit Varma]: I mean the larger picture that I
[Amit Varma]: look at is that
[Amit Varma]: if you think about the biggest
[Amit Varma]: sort of endeavor that
[Amit Varma]: human beings have embarked upon in the last
[Amit Varma]: few hundred years. It is the
[Amit Varma]: endeavor to mitigate
[Amit Varma]: our programming with our culture.
[Amit Varma]: We are the only species
[Amit Varma]: which can actually reflect on our programming
[Amit Varma]: by which I mean our genes that can
[Amit Varma]: think about our instincts and say that
[Amit Varma]: no this is wrong I won't do it. For example a choice
[Amit Varma]: not to have kids is actually against
[Amit Varma]: our programming. We are wired
[Amit Varma]: at some levels to be tribalistic.
[Amit Varma]: We are also wired for the opposite. We are also
[Amit Varma]: wired to be altruistic. Now the point
[Amit Varma]: is like I love Steven Pinker's
[Amit Varma]: birds that nature gives us
[Amit Varma]: knobs nurture turns them.
[Amit Varma]: Now the thing is we have all these knobs.
[Amit Varma]: How are they being turned? Now what social
[Amit Varma]: media has done is especially
[Amit Varma]: Twitter in trying to maximize engagement
[Amit Varma]: like Jonathan Haidt has pointed out how toxic
[Amit Varma]: the Facebook like button and the Twitter retweet
[Amit Varma]: button are and specifically
[Amit Varma]: the Twitter quote tweet for the kind of
[Amit Varma]: rudeness and interactions it encourages.
[Amit Varma]: What it has done is that it has
[Amit Varma]: amplified the worst aspects of
[Amit Varma]: our character. The
[Amit Varma]: tribalism, the antagonism, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas I think that it is
[Amit Varma]: possible to be intentional about it
[Amit Varma]: and say that we won't amplify these
[Amit Varma]: particular buttons but we'll
[Amit Varma]: amplify others because we also
[Amit Varma]: have that sense, that longing for
[Amit Varma]: community, that longing. You know you want
[Amit Varma]: to start those positive feedback loops.
[Amit Varma]: But I think all of that is possible
[Amit Varma]: but the one thing which will make it
[Amit Varma]: possible is if people are well
[Amit Varma]: fed. So we'll take a quick lunch break
[Unknown]: and then we'll come back and
[Amit Varma]: discuss the lessons that both of
[Guest 2]: you have learnt in your rich careers. And food for
[Guest 2]: thought.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I am doing it through
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter. I have started the
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about
[Amit Varma]: whatever catches my fancy. I'll
[Amit Varma]: write about some of the themes I cover in this
[Amit Varma]: podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com and
[Amit Varma]: subscribe. It is free. Once
[Amit Varma]: you sign up, each new installment that I
[Amit Varma]: write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I am chatting with Roshan Abbas and Vikram Sathe
[Amit Varma]: and Roshan just asked me to ask
[Amit Varma]: Vikram an important question.
[Unknown]: Vikram, when are you getting married?
[Guest 2]: I haven't thought about it yet but
[Amit Varma]: maybe one day.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not a principled stand
[Guest 2]: that you'll never get married.
[Guest 2]: I told you I don't think so deeply.
[Guest 1]: We unfortunately lost a friend
[Guest 1]: who actually said
[Guest 1]: that I'll die and you won't get married
[Guest 1]: and that's what happened.
[Guest 1]: Oh I'm so sorry.
[Guest 1]: You know Sajja Chunawala I think or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know he passed away.
[Amit Varma]: Couple of years ago.
[Guest 1]: I used to make a standard joke every time
[Unknown]: that had nothing to do with me.
[Unknown]: Poor Sajja used to always say as a line
[Guest 1]: that Vikram I'll die
[Amit Varma]: and you won't get married.
[Amit Varma]: But Roshan can't say this
[Amit Varma]: because Roshan is going to live
[Unknown]: till 120 years.
[Unknown]: Exactly. So you know in the beginning
[Unknown]: let's do this before we come to everything else.
[Amit Varma]: In the beginning we were talking
[Amit Varma]: about time and money and the moment
[Amit Varma]: I asked the question I thought
[Amit Varma]: Roshan has a lot of time because
[Amit Varma]: you know I think there were three of us
[Amit Varma]: and a fourth person. We were sitting
[Amit Varma]: in Roshan's house and Roshan was talking
[Amit Varma]: about how we are all going to live till 120
[Amit Varma]: and healthy lives. Not that 30 years
[Amit Varma]: have passed in dementia and we don't remember anything
[Amit Varma]: which is already the case with you.
[Amit Varma]: And I asked Roshan
[Amit Varma]: how many of the
[Amit Varma]: four of us on this table will reach 120
[Amit Varma]: and he said at least two.
[Amit Varma]: But I wanted to expound
[Amit Varma]: on that because when you
[Amit Varma]: sort of explain that, everything
[Amit Varma]: about it seemed very
[Amit Varma]: rational and in fact over the last few
[Amit Varma]: months I have also been doing my little
[Amit Varma]: bits of biohacking, reverse type 2 diabetes
[Amit Varma]: all of that. So I understand
[Amit Varma]: that we know a bit
[Amit Varma]: more than we used to and
[Amit Varma]: a lot of progress is being made
[Amit Varma]: in this field not just
[Amit Varma]: in terms of understanding it to begin with.
[Guest 1]: Tell me your thoughts on it.
[Guest 1]: So I think you know when we were growing up
[Guest 1]: and I remember in school whenever
[Guest 1]: there used to be any and you know
[Guest 1]: textbooks used to have a little bit on
[Guest 1]: India's past and stuff and
[Guest 1]: I always remember that it used to say that
[Guest 1]: in the Vedas they used to say that there are four
[Guest 1]: you know parts of
[Guest 1]: a man's life
[Guest 1]: and they used to say 25 years which is Brahmacharya
[Guest 1]: 25 years which is Grahasthya
[Guest 1]: 25 which is Vriddha and 25
[Guest 1]: which is Sanyas. So obviously they were
[Guest 1]: looking at a 100 year life span then
[Guest 1]: as an imagined idea. Now let's
[Guest 1]: say whatever happened, life happened you know
[Guest 1]: and stuff. Today
[Guest 1]: we have now reached with a certain number
[Guest 1]: of scientists and I mean
[Guest 1]: which is why this whole thing about you know
[Guest 1]: what alternate therapies work
[Guest 1]: what don't and
[Guest 1]: now I guess when I have a certain amount of time
[Guest 1]: I've started exploring that a lot. I think a lot of it
[Guest 1]: started with my parents aging.
[Guest 1]: I am like any other
[Guest 1]: person I'm sure I mean I'm obsessed with my parents
[Guest 1]: and I keep constantly trying to see how
[Guest 1]: you know my dad's 82 okay so
[Guest 1]: how can he lead to leave a healthy 100
[Guest 1]: and a
[Guest 1]: wealth conference which I host every year
[Guest 1]: had a person who came and said
[Guest 1]: so once you have made money
[Guest 1]: what stands in the
[Guest 1]: way of you enjoying it and people said
[Guest 1]: you know time and this and that and the
[Guest 1]: person said no it's just health and
[Guest 1]: longevity and which is why
[Guest 1]: most entrepreneurs you know
[Guest 1]: who have made big money are now investing in
[Guest 1]: health tech and are
[Guest 1]: looking at longevity as a science.
[Guest 1]: What this has led to is
[Guest 1]: a lot of you know
[Guest 1]: looking at the future
[Guest 1]: and some amount of looking at the past for solutions.
[Guest 1]: Yesterday I was
[Guest 1]: reading something about the vagus nerve in
[Guest 1]: our body because you know we were talking about
[Guest 1]: anxiety me and my wife and stuff and it said it's a
[Guest 1]: vagabond nerve. It's present
[Guest 1]: it's not present from one point to one point it's present
[Guest 1]: in so many places and then the
[Guest 1]: ways in which bringing down anxiety
[Guest 1]: etc was mentioned seemed a little
[Guest 1]: bit of yoga seemed a little bit of science
[Guest 1]: Deepak Chopra was talking about as well
[Guest 1]: and I'm slowly going towards
[Guest 1]: saying that there are five facts that I have now
[Guest 1]: David Sinclair someone I follow now very closely
[Guest 1]: there is of course
[Guest 1]: Huberman I think is another
[Guest 1]: person who you know talks a lot about health and
[Guest 1]: these two people I follow and
[Guest 1]: David Sinclair I follow like obsessively
[Guest 1]: He's written this great book called Lifespan. Yeah exactly
[Guest 1]: and apart from the book the podcast
[Guest 1]: he did on Lifespan with the person who
[Guest 1]: helped him co-author the book in which they
[Guest 1]: asked a lot of questions and it seemed to break it down
[Guest 1]: ultimately to a couple of things.
[Guest 1]: One was a very simple thing of turning and saying that
[Guest 1]: your body needs enough time
[Guest 1]: to regenerate which is why it requires
[Guest 1]: more than 8 hours of sleep. Most of us don't get
[Guest 1]: that. So A if you can move
[Guest 1]: towards that. Secondly, cells
[Guest 1]: need to be shocked out of complacency
[Guest 1]: so over a period of time
[Guest 1]: our body becomes absolutely complacent. Our muscle
[Guest 1]: tissue at some point will stop generating because
[Guest 1]: your brain is saying I can only now
[Guest 1]: take care of X amount of things so if he's not using
[Guest 1]: his arms too much let that muscle
[Guest 1]: degenerate let me focus on the legs or other parts
[Guest 1]: or whatever. So therefore
[Guest 1]: if you really want to look
[Guest 1]: at how to keep
[Guest 1]: your cells enhanced
[Guest 1]: you've got to give them extremes and which is why if you see
[Guest 1]: there's a lot of extreme temperature therapy.
[Guest 1]: So if you go towards the fjords
[Guest 1]: or anything which is above the Arctic Circle there's
[Guest 1]: a lot of ice dipping that happens.
[Guest 1]: I had gone to Finland for a thing and
[Guest 1]: one day they were doing this breaking an ice
[Guest 1]: thing and actually everybody diving and how long could
[Guest 1]: they stay inside. But today it's a scientifically
[Guest 1]: proven fact that if you spend
[Guest 1]: time in really
[Guest 1]: you know water which is below zero degrees
[Guest 1]: the cells are shocked into saying
[Guest 1]: oh these cells have crossed the extreme
[Guest 1]: they should die. These cells are now
[Guest 1]: in their prime and they need to be primed to
[Guest 1]: handle this as well. Saunas and
[Guest 1]: extreme heat. So therefore extreme
[Guest 1]: temperature events if you introduce in your life
[Guest 1]: they immediately lead to more longevity.
[Guest 1]: Personally I've researched it
[Guest 1]: read about it and I'm trying to see if one can do
[Guest 1]: it to a certain degree. I've tried a little bit of it
[Guest 1]: the ice therapy is bloody cold and
[Guest 1]: difficult but it's crazy when you do it
[Guest 1]: you really feel invigorated. There's something about
[Guest 1]: it. The two things which
[Guest 1]: are chemical formulas which seem
[Guest 1]: to really work is what
[Guest 1]: David Sinclair has researched a
[Guest 1]: lot. Of course a lot of the research is on mice
[Guest 1]: now some of it is getting into human trials
[Guest 1]: or whatever is two
[Guest 1]: things called resveratrol and NMN
[Guest 1]: slash NAD
[Guest 1]: one he calls the petrol the
[Guest 1]: other he calls the accelerator.
[Guest 1]: So he says you know that you need
[Guest 1]: both of them. One
[Guest 1]: helps so after a certain point in
[Guest 1]: time the cells do not produce internal
[Guest 1]: energy to be able to keep themselves going which
[Guest 1]: is why NMN is needed and
[Guest 1]: resveratrol is the pedal
[Guest 1]: which makes sure that there is acceleration
[Guest 1]: in terms of that. So these are two more
[Guest 1]: habits. And then breathing
[Guest 1]: where a lot of
[Guest 1]: what I have learned over the years
[Guest 1]: is now I mean when I did
[Guest 1]: yoga many many years ago and then gave it up
[Guest 1]: entirely and now I just try to practice
[Guest 1]: if nothing else most of
[Guest 1]: people do shallow breathing which is like
[Guest 1]: we take about 12 to 15 breaths in a minute.
[Guest 1]: Whenever you will practice
[Guest 1]: breathing as a practice you will realize
[Guest 1]: that people are bringing it down to about 4 breaths
[Guest 1]: a minute and that is again
[Guest 1]: because you know like so
[Guest 1]: a simple technique is what you call a
[Guest 1]: 4-7-8 which is
[Guest 1]: you take a breath in a sharp exhale
[Guest 1]: inhale of 4 hold for
[Guest 1]: a 7 and exhale at 8. So
[Guest 1]: that with various
[Guest 1]: kinds of breathing you are actually
[Guest 1]: able to get your body rid of a lot
[Guest 1]: of toxins, get a lot of your anxiety out
[Guest 1]: your stress out and I
[Guest 1]: you know I have always looked at cancer
[Guest 1]: and I know that somewhat of cancer obviously
[Guest 1]: I don't know about the heredity
[Guest 1]: I am not a doctor but I have always
[Guest 1]: somehow found that there is a lot of
[Guest 1]: life events that are associated with a
[Guest 1]: set of people who get some of these diseases
[Guest 1]: which has a lot of stress
[Guest 1]: a lot of anxiety and stuff. So I think if
[Guest 1]: one can follow some of these things
[Guest 1]: definitely we
[Guest 1]: will bring our life spans up
[Guest 1]: and it is happening already
[Guest 1]: you know I mean I can easily see
[Guest 1]: 100 but if you
[Guest 1]: are able to even do your diet
[Guest 1]: you know which and food is something
[Guest 1]: which is the only place where I don't want to control
[Guest 1]: my diet I want to enjoy good food
[Guest 1]: with this combination 120
[Guest 1]: and it is happening. You go to
[Guest 1]: Okinawa and I mean this entire research
[Guest 1]: that happened about Japan and
[Guest 1]: why the people in this particular region of Japan
[Guest 1]: have an average life span
[Guest 1]: of about 100 plus and some of them
[Guest 1]: are 120, 118 etc
[Guest 1]: have lived that long and lived
[Guest 1]: healthy lives to that age
[Guest 1]: so I personally believe
[Guest 1]: in this I am trying a lot of this right
[Guest 1]: now so maybe in
[Guest 1]: episode 3000 and whatever
[Guest 1]: when you and I have reached that healthy
[Unknown]: happy 100 we will celebrate it
[Amit Varma]: Sir you will reach there
[Amit Varma]: don't expect too much from me
[Amit Varma]: No no I mean
[Amit Varma]: I mean the part that scares
[Amit Varma]: me about aging is really the decline
[Amit Varma]: you know I saw my father's quick decline
[Amit Varma]: where he kind of almost lost his personhood
[Amit Varma]: in a sense your autonomy goes your
[Amit Varma]: dignity is a threat and all of that
[Amit Varma]: and that's something that kind of
[Amit Varma]: scares me about it so what kind of lifestyle changes
[Amit Varma]: did you have you actually
[Guest 1]: so as I told you that
[Guest 1]: supplements is something I am definitely doing
[Guest 1]: breathing I definitely try to do
[Guest 1]: currently I try to do it for about 15 minutes
[Guest 1]: I am also a big hacker in terms of
[Guest 1]: finding tech so there are
[Guest 1]: at least two devices that I started
[Guest 1]: using quite regularly
[Guest 1]: one was almost this brain scan
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: Muse is what it's called
[Guest 1]: and it's a band that was actually created
[Guest 1]: originally to check brain waves then they realize
[Guest 1]: they can actually start telling your theta
[Guest 1]: state your beta state etc and if you
[Guest 1]: actually use that app and it is phenomenally
[Guest 1]: well done the app
[Guest 1]: it's able to give you
[Guest 1]: a very deep understanding of which meditative
[Guest 1]: state you are in and I
[Guest 1]: really really enjoy that
[Guest 1]: I practice that
[Guest 1]: it's now reaching the next level
[Guest 1]: as another device that is coming in
[Guest 1]: we both tried to do that glucose
[Guest 1]: monitoring, CGM
[Guest 1]: and Sathe is a big
[Guest 1]: proponent of it in fact he is invested in a company
[Guest 1]: that is working on that as well
[Guest 1]: I just think the price point is very high
[Guest 1]: for average people right now to be able to do it
[Guest 1]: because 4000 bucks sold for
[Guest 1]: 15 days is a little high for
[Guest 1]: everybody to invest, my mother almost died when I told her
[Guest 1]: that 4000 bucks
[Guest 1]: I was like mom what is the point
[Guest 1]: but you know again I think
[Guest 1]: as long as you can monitor, of course there are people
[Guest 1]: who have views of saying how much you should
[Guest 1]: monitor but I don't get anxious
[Guest 1]: so the thing is that I am not, I am constantly
[Guest 1]: looking on it and saying hey this is just one more
[Guest 1]: parameter that I can possibly tweak with
[Guest 1]: Alzheimer's if you don't know
[Guest 1]: even reading but the drug which is
[Guest 1]: now shown about 28%
[Guest 1]: people have had reduction of
[Guest 1]: symptoms, it's definitely going to
[Guest 1]: clinical trial, it's already doing some
[Guest 1]: human trials, I think it will be full, so
[Guest 1]: there was another book that I came across
[Amit Varma]: I think which, Factfulness if I am not mistaken
[Amit Varma]: Hans Rosling, right and which turned
[Guest 1]: and said that look at the facts around
[Guest 1]: you and some of the facts will actually prove to you
[Guest 1]: that we are in a better world than before
[Guest 1]: what a different world, right
[Guest 1]: what was disease 200
[Guest 1]: years ago and what it is, so if you look at just
[Guest 1]: that cycle, look at where
[Guest 1]: we are going to go, so I am constantly monitoring
[Guest 1]: it, I keep doing a couple of these things
[Guest 1]: that extreme, so we've just yesterday started
[Guest 1]: looking for a bathtub in which we can
[Guest 1]: put ice and do ice baths, I don't know
[Guest 1]: where that will lead but it's going
[Guest 1]: to be, so Shahid and I are both very excited by it at the
[Guest 2]: moment. So I
[Guest 2]: also kind
[Guest 2]: of interacted with a lot of scientists
[Guest 2]: in that company that I am invested in called
[Guest 2]: Genepath Diagnostics and these are
[Guest 2]: mostly geneticists,
[Guest 2]: so they typically
[Guest 2]: avoid answering these questions because they
[Guest 2]: are into pure science, right, they are
[Guest 2]: into solving medical problems
[Guest 2]: at the moment, saying that hey, how do you
[Guest 2]: detect blood cancers, how do you
[Guest 2]: solve the problem of spinal muscular atrophy
[Guest 2]: in Turkey where we've got a great deal
[Guest 2]: where the Turkish government believes that
[Guest 2]: the amount of money that you are
[Guest 2]: going to spend in curing patients
[Guest 2]: will be far higher
[Guest 2]: than money you will spend on
[Guest 2]: diagnosing, so it makes sense that you
[Guest 2]: diagnose an entire population and it might
[Guest 2]: be cheaper for you to identify
[Guest 2]: those patients, treat them effectively
[Guest 2]: rather than doing a random
[Guest 2]: cure for a lot of people and having
[Guest 2]: the insurance come into play. So
[Guest 2]: what I realized after talking to them, there is
[Guest 2]: a triangle,
[Guest 2]: one is what Roshan talked about is stress
[Guest 2]: and anxiety, it's the cause of
[Guest 2]: major diseases, now that you
[Guest 2]: can solve by yoga or whatever you
[Guest 2]: do, breathing exercise and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: The other two components that kind
[Guest 2]: of excited me and as you rightly said
[Guest 2]: whether it is the Googles, whether it's the
[Guest 2]: Facebooks of the world, all the big
[Guest 2]: companies are trying to live for another 40 years
[Guest 2]: so all their excess research in the name of
[Guest 2]: hey we want to do impact work in health
[Guest 2]: is basically trying to solve these problems
[Guest 2]: and the two problems that I thought
[Guest 2]: that resonated with me
[Guest 2]: one was a field called
[Guest 2]: pharmacogenomics
[Guest 2]: and the other field was
[Guest 2]: basically
[Guest 2]: slowing down degeneration of white
[Guest 2]: loggers, so the pharmacogenomics
[Guest 2]: is a very interesting
[Guest 2]: field of play, what it essentially
[Guest 2]: says is that suppose
[Guest 2]: you use a certain statin or
[Guest 2]: for that you use a blood pressure medicine
[Guest 2]: for your blood pressure,
[Guest 2]: you have to understand that all blood
[Guest 2]: pressure medicines may not work
[Guest 2]: on everybody, so
[Guest 2]: therefore I will do a clinical analysis
[Guest 2]: of your blood
[Guest 2]: sample, I will do a full analysis
[Guest 2]: and I will tell you that for each of your
[Guest 2]: organs or each of your
[Guest 2]: medical problems, these are
[Guest 2]: the set of medicines that you should be taking
[Guest 2]: and the effectiveness
[Guest 2]: of the medicine on your body
[Guest 1]: is post-genetic, tailored to your genes
[Guest 2]: and that I have seen with
[Guest 2]: a promoter, Dr. Nikhil
[Guest 2]: Zakarda's father, his father was diagnosed
[Guest 2]: with fourth stage cancer
[Guest 2]: and nothing was
[Guest 2]: working and unfortunately in Indian
[Guest 2]: system it's more about cure,
[Guest 2]: sometimes beyond
[Guest 2]: the realm of cure, you
[Guest 2]: don't go into alternate solving
[Guest 2]: problem solving
[Guest 2]: so he went and spoke to a company
[Guest 2]: in the US and they said that
[Guest 2]: the best way to treat this is to kind of find
[Guest 2]: out which medicines work more
[Guest 2]: effectively on him, they did an entire
[Guest 2]: pharmacogenomics genetic study on
[Guest 2]: him and they realized that two basic
[Guest 2]: problems which are not cancer related
[Guest 2]: they changed the medicines
[Guest 2]: and he got better and how
[Guest 2]: so the moral of the story is
[Guest 2]: that there will be
[Guest 2]: customized medicine in the future
[Guest 2]: and the moment customized medicine happens
[Guest 2]: you're automatically making it
[Unknown]: you're increasing your age by 10%
[Guest 2]: so all your diseases
[Guest 2]: or medicines that you're going to take after the age
[Guest 2]: of 50 or whatever were statins
[Guest 2]: whether it is diabetic medicines, you are automatically
[Guest 2]: increasing by 10%
[Guest 2]: so if you're 80, you've already gone to 90 to some extent
[Guest 2]: the third part of it is
[Guest 2]: very interesting, he's saying that
[Guest 2]: if there are 6 or 7 vital
[Guest 2]: organs, I don't remember how many we have
[Guest 2]: but if you identify
[Guest 2]: a weak spot, so for example
[Guest 2]: sugar is your problem
[Guest 2]: two of the biggest killers as we all know
[Guest 2]: is sugar and salt
[Guest 2]: and it's obviously coming from a point that
[Guest 2]: our brains are still wired millions of years
[Guest 2]: ago but our technology has enabled
[Guest 2]: us to not adapt from a
[Guest 2]: physical condition and therefore
[Guest 2]: we human beings have created
[Guest 2]: n number of sugary
[Guest 2]: foods and salty foods
[Guest 2]: which kind of up our dopamine
[Guest 2]: levels but we have to understand
[Guest 2]: that we got all
[Guest 2]: of this through the forest through only
[Guest 2]: one discovery of a little honey
[Guest 2]: in one month's time so
[Guest 2]: we stored all this salts and
[Guest 2]: fats and now we are getting it
[Guest 2]: in huge quantities and therefore that's
[Guest 2]: causing the degeneration so what do you do
[Guest 2]: you identify suppose your weak link is
[Guest 2]: heart or your
[Guest 2]: weak link is liver then
[Guest 2]: you make sure that all your
[Guest 2]: degenerative organs are treated
[Guest 2]: in such a way using
[Guest 2]: even to the extent of bio
[Guest 2]: hacks as well
[Guest 2]: as bionic
[Guest 2]: I mean injectables
[Guest 2]: and make sure that your overall
[Guest 2]: degeneration stops so if you do these
[Guest 2]: two things automatically in 20 years you are
[Unknown]: up so apart from the fact
[Unknown]: that
[Guest 2]: I think they are getting there
[Guest 2]: solve the problem 20% by just
[Guest 2]: doing these two things and then if you have a technological
[Guest 2]: breakthrough like what you are saying
[Guest 2]: the two medicines or whatever
[Guest 2]: what was that? NMN, Resveratrol
[Unknown]: that must be why they named it
[Unknown]: they must have said
[Guest 1]: I must tell you
[Guest 1]: they discovered that it comes from the skin of grapes
[Guest 1]: so somebody said how much wine
[Guest 1]: 20 years
[Guest 1]: thousands of glasses will give you
[Guest 2]: the amount you require
[Guest 2]: but that's the problem right that if the medical industry
[Unknown]: ties up with the alcohol industry
[Guest 2]: I mean today if you look at the degeneration
[Guest 2]: caused because of the component
[Guest 2]: which is not sugar in alcohol
[Guest 2]: now for example you wear the CGM
[Guest 2]: your single malt doesn't cause you a spike
[Amit Varma]: your gins don't cause you a spike
[Amit Varma]: I was amazed
[Amit Varma]: but with the tonic they will right?
[Guest 2]: with a low sugar tonic
[Guest 2]: exactly
[Guest 2]: but that's anyway non-alcoholic right?
[Guest 2]: the point is that if the degeneration is
[Guest 2]: caused by the alcohol component
[Guest 2]: now imagine tomorrow Google
[Guest 2]: creates an antidote to the alcohol
[Guest 2]: that is settling on your liver
[Guest 2]: or your fat liver deposits that are happening
[Amit Varma]: game changer
[Amit Varma]: I will tell you what a game changer is
[Amit Varma]: there is this guy Abbey Phillips who is known on twitter as a liver doctor
[Amit Varma]: he recorded with me a few days ago
[Amit Varma]: his episode will come out after yours
[Amit Varma]: but this is not a spoiler because
[Amit Varma]: what I am about to tell you is something he told me
[Amit Varma]: after the conversation
[Amit Varma]: so it's not part of my conversation with him
[Amit Varma]: now during the conversation he mentioned that he did
[Amit Varma]: the first stool transplant
[Amit Varma]: in the world for liver disease
[Amit Varma]: so I asked him about it after thinking
[Amit Varma]: what is a funda
[Amit Varma]: and the funda was he was trying to prove
[Amit Varma]: like the same way people say type 2 diabetes is not reversible
[Amit Varma]: even though I have reversed mine
[Amit Varma]: people also say cirrhosis is not reversible
[Amit Varma]: and he decided
[Amit Varma]: to try and reverse it
[Amit Varma]: by basically changing the bacteria
[Amit Varma]: in those parts of the body
[Amit Varma]: whatever they are, so they were bad bacteria
[Amit Varma]: he said I will do a stool transplant
[Amit Varma]: introduce good bacteria, see what happens
[Unknown]: and he has published studies on this
[Amit Varma]: does this happen?
[Amit Varma]: let me finish, the most interesting part comes later
[Amit Varma]: so he did a stool transplant
[Amit Varma]: to a person who had alcoholic cirrhosis
[Amit Varma]: one the cirrhosis reversed
[Amit Varma]: because a good bacteria took over
[Amit Varma]: that is fine, that is not incredible
[Amit Varma]: that's what you would expect
[Amit Varma]: the interesting part is a person stopped wanting alcohol
[Amit Varma]: he stopped wanting alcohol
[Amit Varma]: because his addiction pathway
[Amit Varma]: or whatever the technical term is
[Amit Varma]: the good bacteria
[Amit Varma]: affected that as well
[Amit Varma]: apparently what was happening was there was a feedback loop
[Amit Varma]: between his taking all the alcohol
[Amit Varma]: the bad bacteria forming
[Amit Varma]: and the bad bacteria wanting him to take more alcohol
[Amit Varma]: and it became a vicious circle
[Amit Varma]: he changes the bacteria
[Amit Varma]: you stop wanting it, so my next question to Abby
[Amit Varma]: which they are really still looking into
[Amit Varma]: is does this mean that suppose cirrhosis
[Amit Varma]: is not there but the person
[Amit Varma]: drinks a lot, can you do a stool transplant
[Amit Varma]: and have him drinking less
[Amit Varma]: and he said that yes that is eminently possible
[Amit Varma]: that seems to be the
[Amit Varma]: he has published 165 studies
[Amit Varma]: including some on this
[Amit Varma]: so you know science
[Amit Varma]: is that way incredible
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: and if you look at it
[Guest 1]: there was a time
[Guest 1]: when there were so many of these food shows coming
[Guest 1]: and then one went down a rabbit hole
[Guest 1]: and this whole thing about how the
[Guest 1]: sugar industry took over and created
[Guest 1]: these norms in our head
[Guest 1]: of what is good and what is bad to eat
[Guest 1]: I mean it has now been proven
[Guest 1]: that ghee is now
[Guest 1]: considered to be the best thing
[Guest 1]: and we were bought up for saying don't take ghee
[Guest 2]: My mom has
[Guest 2]: told me so many times
[Guest 2]: eat yellow only for eggs
[Amit Varma]: don't eat white
[Amit Varma]: no no but the actual truth is
[Amit Varma]: yolk is the healthiest part of the egg
[Amit Varma]: like whenever I see people having an
[Guest 2]: egg white omelette I'm like
[Amit Varma]: what nonsense is this
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you what I think the science
[Amit Varma]: of nutrition is
[Amit Varma]: people think that medical science
[Amit Varma]: is in the same state of advancement
[Amit Varma]: across domains
[Amit Varma]: actually it is not there are parts of it
[Amit Varma]: where we are not that advanced
[Amit Varma]: we are not as good as understanding
[Amit Varma]: pancreatic cancer as we are
[Amit Varma]: at understanding prostate cancer
[Amit Varma]: both of them would kill you
[Amit Varma]: 2000 years ago today one of them kills you
[Amit Varma]: right more or less
[Amit Varma]: so I think nutrition is kind of like that
[Amit Varma]: where we are discovering more but what we do know
[Amit Varma]: is that the sugar lobby funded all these
[Amit Varma]: studies at Harvard and elsewhere in the
[Amit Varma]: 50s and 60s which demonized
[Amit Varma]: fat and said sugar was fine
[Amit Varma]: the American health association
[Amit Varma]: or whatever the official body was brought out
[Amit Varma]: a dietary guideline in 1977
[Amit Varma]: and if you look at a graph of obesity
[Amit Varma]: in America the graph goes up
[Amit Varma]: from there it is so stark
[Guest 1]: and do you know that the very first report
[Guest 1]: they did talking about this either show
[Guest 1]: you know about what
[Guest 1]: fat does to you was a study
[Guest 1]: done on three people and
[Guest 1]: that was a published result saying this is
[Guest 1]: a study three
[Guest 1]: people like I mean just the three people
[Guest 2]: in this room
[Amit Varma]: it's like
[Guest 1]: study
[Guest 1]: you heard about that joke
[Guest 1]: right that about the founder
[Guest 1]: of KFC comes to the Pope and says
[Guest 1]: can you just replace
[Guest 1]: give us this day our daily bread for give us this day
[Guest 1]: our daily chicken right and they said
[Guest 1]: no no no and he said I'll cut a million dollar check
[Guest 1]: and he said no no no he said we'll do a 10 million dollar check
[Guest 1]: no no no a 100 million dollar check he agrees
[Guest 1]: so he goes back to the congregation and says
[Guest 1]: guys you know I've got to tell you
[Guest 1]: we've got a 100 million check
[Guest 1]: which has come in we've got to change
[Guest 1]: give us this day our daily bread to give us
[Guest 1]: this day our daily chicken but we've also lost
[Unknown]: the modern bread account
[Unknown]: yeah
[Guest 1]: and I genuinely feel that the way
[Guest 1]: media has
[Guest 1]: manipulated minds over the
[Guest 2]: years and see apart from that
[Guest 2]: as I was saying before
[Guest 2]: that sugar and salt was something that
[Guest 2]: you stored in the past right and
[Guest 2]: now the options of sugar and salt is so
[Guest 2]: high and then they've used visual cues
[Guest 2]: of saying slicey
[Guest 2]: and this and that so your
[Guest 2]: need for sugar and salt has been taken
[Guest 2]: into like 100x
[Guest 2]: your body is degenerating at a regular pace
[Unknown]: yeah and I'll
[Amit Varma]: put all these links on why
[Amit Varma]: sugar is bad and fat is perfectly fine
[Amit Varma]: in my show notes and I'll also have you know
[Amit Varma]: that my HbA1c in July was 7.7
[Amit Varma]: it is now 5.7
[Unknown]: yeah
[Amit Varma]: reduced with
[Amit Varma]: purely with diet keto plus intermittent
[Amit Varma]: fasting so any doctor who
[Amit Varma]: tells you type 2 diabetes cannot be reversed
[Amit Varma]: his knowledge is outdated
[Amit Varma]: and he's probably over 40 and you certainly
[Guest 2]: can't treat him like a quack
[Guest 2]: and I must tell you that diabetologists have
[Guest 2]: no idea of diet
[Amit Varma]: so it's a very broad statement
[Amit Varma]: because they got their medical degrees
[Guest 2]: at a time where the knowledge wasn't that advanced
[Guest 2]: and also the thing is that
[Guest 2]: it's not in their interest to tell the patient
[Unknown]: that you eat this and that
[Amit Varma]: correct
[Guest 2]: and the OPD system which is a
[Guest 2]: flawed system I think that
[Guest 2]: you're spending 15 minutes with the patient
[Guest 2]: you're not understanding their lifestyle
[Guest 2]: what is your HbA1c score
[Guest 2]: and we're giving you medicines right
[Guest 2]: but the idea of a good diabetologist is to tell you
[Guest 2]: how to prevent diabetes
[Guest 2]: and that requires a lot of study on the science
[Guest 2]: of diet which is probably
[Amit Varma]: not covered in that level
[Amit Varma]: it's purely a dietary disease
[Amit Varma]: and can be reversed with only diet
[Amit Varma]: I stopped medication on the day that I
[Unknown]: and this happened because of CGM
[Unknown]: it's a game changer
[Amit Varma]: and you know everyone should
[Amit Varma]: everyone should understand their own body
[Unknown]: and everyone should know that
[Unknown]: single malt does not increase
[Unknown]: sugar
[Unknown]: everyone should know that
[Amit Varma]: the big question is
[Guest 2]: what does it do to your liver
[Guest 2]: which my friend Abbey Phillips
[Guest 2]: when that episode is later
[Unknown]: let them discover it then
[Unknown]: for 2 weeks
[Amit Varma]: finish low single malt
[Guest 1]: after you listen to that episode
[Unknown]: and I must say
[Guest 1]: that what you just reminded me of
[Guest 1]: about this intermittent fasting
[Guest 1]: was one of the things that David Sinclair also spoke about
[Guest 1]: saying that we were used to
[Guest 1]: 8 hour cycles
[Guest 1]: or max 12 hours
[Guest 1]: and if you notice
[Guest 1]: in every religion
[Guest 1]: fasting is there
[Guest 1]: we left it
[Guest 1]: but you just do that
[Guest 1]: and I've seen
[Guest 1]: Shaheen do intermittent fasting
[Guest 1]: and I can just see its impact on her
[Guest 2]: you say that and now you're ordering food
[Amit Varma]: no I'm ordering for myself
[Amit Varma]: I mean this is a big lesson
[Amit Varma]: and by the way speaking on sleep I'll also link
[Amit Varma]: another great book from the show notes called
[Amit Varma]: why we sleep by Matthew Walker
[Amit Varma]: which also opened my eyes to the importance
[Amit Varma]: of sleeping well
[Unknown]: which is why I fed you all the lunch that I did
[Unknown]: that whether there is conversation or not
[Amit Varma]: sleep will come
[Amit Varma]: so
[Amit Varma]: I want to ask both of you
[Amit Varma]: about lessons that you've learnt in your life
[Amit Varma]: because even in personal conversation
[Amit Varma]: I feel like I've learnt things from you
[Amit Varma]: but I'll start with you Vikram and I want to ask you about
[Amit Varma]: you know earlier we spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: in a sense when you
[Amit Varma]: entered these cricketing circles
[Amit Varma]: you were quasi part of them
[Amit Varma]: in the sense you were a player yourself
[Amit Varma]: you understood the game
[Amit Varma]: it's just an accident of talent that you weren't
[Guest 2]: in the side with Tendulkar
[Guest 2]: but on the side
[Amit Varma]: you just made me feel good
[Amit Varma]: it's just an accident of talent
[Amit Varma]: don't tell me you were as talented as him and didn't work hard
[Amit Varma]: that would be sad
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: two kinds of lessons that I've heard you speak about
[Amit Varma]: one is
[Amit Varma]: lessons about sport itself
[Amit Varma]: and the other is
[Amit Varma]: lessons about life that you have then
[Amit Varma]: extrapolated from those
[Amit Varma]: which you felt applied to
[Guest 2]: much deeper things
[Guest 2]: so the life one I'll probably cover
[Guest 2]: in the second part
[Guest 2]: let me give you a couple of examples
[Guest 2]: of a few cricketers
[Guest 2]: which kind of
[Guest 2]: exposed my mind to
[Guest 2]: what happens when you
[Guest 2]: discover yourself as a sports
[Guest 2]: person and find your own path
[Guest 2]: in your journey of becoming an international sports
[Guest 2]: person and let me
[Guest 2]: start with Virender Sehwag
[Guest 2]: I had the opportunity of
[Guest 2]: spending a lot of time with him
[Guest 2]: in his initial years and up until now
[Guest 2]: and I realised that
[Guest 2]: India is full of untapped
[Guest 2]: Sehwags
[Guest 2]: the reason why he got tapped is because
[Guest 2]: he understood himself
[Guest 2]: and I'll tell you how, I remember that
[Guest 2]: interview that Ravi Shastri was doing in Sri Lanka
[Guest 2]: and I was hovering around there and
[Guest 2]: Ravi Shastri tried to complicate
[Guest 2]: Sehwag's mind by asking him technical
[Guest 2]: questions in English in the post-match interview
[Guest 2]: which he was doing in his initial years
[Guest 2]: and he said, Sehwag, the ball
[Guest 2]: was coming on to the bat, not much
[Guest 2]: grass on it, whatever little grass
[Guest 2]: is basically dead grass
[Guest 2]: rolled on to keep the wicket together
[Guest 2]: how did you gauge the bounce of the wicket
[Guest 2]: and that was a fabulous innings
[Guest 2]: it's nothing like that sir
[Guest 2]: the ball was coming on the bat, I just hit it
[Guest 2]: and when he said
[Guest 2]: this, I said, this guy is
[Guest 2]: special because he did not
[Guest 2]: complicate the answer
[Guest 2]: and he did not complicate his cricket
[Guest 2]: and that's when I went
[Guest 2]: to him and said, Viru
[Guest 2]: what are you thinking?
[Guest 2]: and he said, Sathe sir, let me tell you
[Guest 2]: a couple of things that I learned
[Guest 2]: and that is
[Guest 2]: no matter how much homework you do
[Guest 2]: how simple you want to keep the game
[Guest 2]: this is the ultimate goal of life
[Guest 2]: so I said, explain it to me
[Guest 2]: he said, the thing is
[Guest 2]: when I came to cricket, I came to become a Tendulkar
[Guest 2]: and the biggest lesson of my life
[Guest 2]: was when I understood
[Guest 2]: that I have to find the Sehwag within me
[Guest 2]: I don't want to become a Tendulkar
[Guest 2]: because I was going to become a Tendulkar
[Guest 2]: but that was not happening
[Guest 2]: because Tendulkar's benchmark was very high
[Guest 2]: and in my batting, I was trying to
[Guest 2]: model around him
[Guest 2]: so I thought that until I
[Guest 2]: find the player within me
[Guest 2]: and that time I talked to John Wright
[Guest 2]: and Tendulkar and I started
[Guest 2]: preferring the opening slot
[Guest 2]: because I knew that
[Guest 2]: game change can only happen
[Guest 2]: when you dominate in the first 10 overs
[Guest 2]: and see what a revolutionary idea
[Guest 2]: that is right
[Guest 2]: look at the modern day T20 cricket
[Guest 2]: you are talking of the power play
[Guest 2]: the reason England won the T20 world cup
[Guest 2]: is because of Butler and Hales
[Guest 2]: up the order and the reason we did not win it
[Guest 2]: because your best 2 batters on top of the game
[Guest 2]: were not in form
[Guest 2]: so he explained to me that how this was a thought
[Guest 2]: which he backed himself to do
[Guest 2]: under the guidance of John Wright
[Guest 2]: and there was this very funny story
[Guest 2]: that he said that
[Guest 2]: there are 2 types of players
[Guest 2]: one who do over analysis
[Guest 2]: and the other who are like me
[Guest 2]: who trust their instincts
[Guest 2]: he said that we were
[Guest 2]: cracking Muralitharan
[Guest 2]: in Sri Lanka
[Guest 2]: so Sachin told me
[Guest 2]: that if you see Muralitharan's thumb
[Guest 2]: then you can play Muralitharan well
[Guest 2]: because if the thumb is up
[Guest 2]: it means that his arm has turned
[Guest 2]: and it means that he will put another
[Guest 2]: so Rahul Bhai said yes
[Guest 2]: he played the video
[Guest 2]: yes Sachin you are absolutely right
[Guest 2]: like the thumb
[Guest 2]: Lakshman is saying yes
[Guest 2]: this is very good
[Guest 2]: I told him that I cannot see anything
[Guest 2]: Murali black, thumb black
[Guest 2]: I did not see anything
[Unknown]: he genuinely said it
[Guest 2]: he said but I have decided
[Guest 2]: that I do not have the thinking
[Guest 2]: of Dravid Tendulkar
[Guest 2]: so I will use my methodology
[Guest 2]: to tackle Muralitharan
[Guest 2]: so he said what did I do
[Guest 2]: I said I played with Muralitharan's mind
[Guest 2]: I decided that whatever Muralitharan will put
[Guest 2]: in the first 8 balls
[Guest 2]: I will play it in off
[Guest 2]: as soon as I will back myself and play in off
[Guest 2]: Muralitharan will feel that I am holding
[Guest 2]: his other
[Guest 2]: and he will change his trajectory
[Guest 2]: and will come in normal offspin
[Guest 2]: and you know that offspinner
[Guest 2]: is not a bowler for me
[Guest 2]: but look at the
[Guest 2]: method in the madness
[Guest 2]: and that is what Rahul Dravid explained to me
[Guest 2]: that you have to understand that non conventional people
[Guest 2]: find easier solutions
[Guest 2]: but that won't work for me
[Guest 2]: I and Sachin would always look deeper into the problem
[Guest 2]: but to ensure that he
[Guest 2]: doesn't emulate a Tendulkar and get
[Guest 2]: over analytical and put
[Guest 2]: himself under pressure
[Guest 2]: he found a solution which was
[Guest 2]: which worked for him and I thought that
[Guest 2]: was a great lesson that I learnt for him
[Guest 2]: that at the end of the day you may study whatever
[Guest 2]: you study and understand you read books
[Guest 2]: but when you have to solve
[Guest 2]: a certain problem you take everything
[Guest 2]: around you and then you solve it your way
[Guest 2]: and I thought that was a great lesson
[Guest 2]: and today many a times when you look at new
[Guest 2]: players like Surya Kumar Yadav
[Guest 2]: you look at
[Guest 2]: David Warner in his own way
[Guest 2]: you look at Joss Butler
[Guest 2]: you will see a methodology of finding
[Guest 2]: themselves even like David Warner
[Guest 2]: publicly says that for me
[Guest 2]: Viru's suggestion of going
[Guest 2]: up the order and finding myself
[Guest 2]: actually changed my cricket
[Guest 2]: so that is one lesson I learnt
[Guest 2]: from somebody like Avininder Sehwag
[Guest 2]: very interesting lesson I learnt from
[Guest 2]: Ricky Ponting and I think this is
[Guest 2]: something that Roshan will resonate with
[Guest 2]: as well because it's about
[Guest 2]: perspective. I was in conversation
[Guest 2]: with Ponting we were doing like a 7 city
[Guest 2]: tour with ING Bank
[Guest 2]: and I asked Ricky Ponting that
[Guest 2]: you know I played little bit of under 19
[Guest 2]: cricket and stuff like that and we never found
[Guest 2]: gaps. When you are a batsman
[Guest 2]: you play by instinct if it
[Guest 2]: goes in a gap you take a single or
[Guest 2]: you just whatever
[Guest 2]: you don't take a single
[Guest 2]: so he said that this is where the growth
[Guest 2]: of a batsman happens
[Guest 2]: explain it to me how does it happen
[Guest 2]: so he said in the initial
[Guest 2]: years of my batting when I came
[Guest 2]: into bat I would look at the
[Guest 2]: fielders and I would have
[Guest 2]: these fielders in my subconscious
[Guest 2]: and that would give me
[Guest 2]: a framework based on
[Guest 2]: how I am going to react because at the time
[Guest 2]: the ball is coming at 140
[Guest 2]: you are just backing what you have learned
[Guest 2]: over the years but your subconscious
[Guest 2]: graph that you have will
[Guest 2]: give you a sense of where the ball will
[Guest 2]: go. He said over a period of
[Guest 2]: time I started realizing that my gaps
[Guest 2]: were going down and I thought
[Guest 2]: to myself what was the problem
[Guest 2]: and one day it dawned to me that
[Guest 2]: I needed to change my reference point
[Guest 2]: so I said what is the reference
[Guest 2]: point and that
[Guest 2]: one sentence I thought was the most
[Guest 2]: outstanding statement said by somebody
[Guest 2]: he said a good batsman
[Guest 2]: imprints the fielders in the
[Guest 2]: subconscious a great
[Guest 2]: batsman imprints the gaps
[Guest 2]: the moment
[Guest 2]: that reference points had become the
[Guest 2]: gaps he said I started
[Guest 2]: finding the gaps beautifully
[Guest 2]: and I remember sharing this
[Guest 2]: story in a Bajaj auto show
[Guest 2]: and Rajiv Bajaj came up to me and said that
[Guest 2]: Vikram this is the most profound thing I have learned
[Guest 2]: in business when you look at competition
[Guest 2]: you behave like the competition
[Guest 2]: if you look at the need gaps of the market
[Amit Varma]: you create a great product
[Amit Varma]: I have a before you resume I have a
[Amit Varma]: story which this reminded me of
[Amit Varma]: so around the time of the second
[Amit Varma]: world war there were a bunch of experts
[Amit Varma]: I think in the American party or
[Amit Varma]: the allied forces that put
[Amit Varma]: together a bunch of experts which
[Amit Varma]: was so unique that
[Amit Varma]: I think at one point they said that Milton
[Amit Varma]: Friedman had only there
[Amit Varma]: been in a room where you know there were
[Amit Varma]: two people smarter than him you know
[Amit Varma]: that kind of company and one of those
[Amit Varma]: guys was a guy called Abraham Wald
[Amit Varma]: now Abraham Wald was given
[Amit Varma]: a problem that a lot of
[Amit Varma]: our planes are coming back from
[Amit Varma]: the war and you know
[Amit Varma]: we are losing a lot of planes but
[Amit Varma]: can you look at the planes that are coming back
[Unknown]: and figure out why we are losing them
[Amit Varma]: where are the bullet holes and what's
[Amit Varma]: happening so he looked
[Amit Varma]: over the wings there are so many bullet holes
[Amit Varma]: fuselage has so many bullet holes
[Amit Varma]: the nose has so many bullet holes what are the problem areas
[Amit Varma]: where do we need to put armor
[Amit Varma]: the engine had no bullet holes
[Amit Varma]: so everybody is like wings ko karte hain
[Amit Varma]: fuselage ko karte hain and Wald said no engine ko karo
[Amit Varma]: and they said why engine there are
[Amit Varma]: no bullet holes there so he said obviously
[Amit Varma]: there are no bullet holes there that means that every time
[Amit Varma]: a bullet hits an engine the plane is going down
[Amit Varma]: so none of them are coming back
[Amit Varma]: which is also a way of sort of
[Guest 2]: looking at the gaps
[Guest 2]: not thinking in the way that others
[Guest 2]: do
[Guest 2]: and I have seen this pattern in all great
[Guest 2]: writers that they see gaps
[Guest 2]: and whereas others see
[Guest 2]: other reference points and so
[Guest 2]: during this journey talking to a ponting
[Guest 2]: like you know the other great story that
[Guest 2]: I heard from Glenn Magra
[Guest 2]: and he's written it in his book as well
[Guest 2]: and many people talk about visualization
[Guest 2]: and that's where again the longevity factor
[Guest 2]: also come into play that and that comes
[Guest 2]: from yoga also that
[Guest 2]: a good yoga teacher which normally doesn't
[Guest 2]: happen you don't find a yoga teacher
[Guest 2]: good yoga teacher easily they'll focus
[Guest 2]: on flexibility but very few people
[Guest 2]: will tell you that in the shavasana
[Guest 2]: process you actually have to
[Guest 2]: leave your breath from every part of
[Guest 2]: your body so when you
[Guest 2]: are leaving your breath during
[Guest 2]: shavasana my yoga teacher
[Guest 2]: would tell me now focus on
[Guest 2]: the artery where
[Guest 2]: the blood is flowing from and now
[Guest 2]: breathe out from there which is the
[Guest 2]: weakest organ you think of your body
[Guest 2]: leave your breath from there
[Guest 2]: so what essentially they are saying is about
[Guest 2]: the act of visualization which is huge
[Guest 2]: in sport right that
[Guest 2]: Sachin Tendulkar jokingly used to say
[Guest 2]: that many people talk about me not being able
[Guest 2]: to sleep before a match he said that
[Guest 2]: when I visualize a game what happens
[Guest 2]: in when I'm sleeping that game
[Guest 2]: is being played so
[Guest 2]: I can't sleep not because I
[Guest 2]: have insomnia it's because the next
[Guest 2]: days I am visualizing three slips
[Guest 2]: in a gully Magra bowling at 140
[Guest 2]: what is the line that's why I can't sleep
[Guest 2]: but that also helps me prepare better
[Guest 2]: in the next game and this
[Guest 2]: amazing story about Michael Phelps
[Guest 2]: about visualization which is
[Guest 2]: one of my favorite stories
[Guest 2]: is every big
[Guest 2]: session of Michael Phelps
[Guest 2]: and this is a mixture between
[Guest 2]: visualization and purposeful practice
[Guest 2]: as you would know purposeful practice
[Guest 2]: essentially means that you
[Guest 2]: start practicing under pressure
[Guest 2]: you do the difficult things
[Guest 2]: so the great Alex Ferguson had said that many people
[Guest 2]: asked me that you know why does
[Guest 2]: can you score the best goals in the last
[Guest 2]: 10 minutes because he said we practice for it
[Guest 2]: after every session
[Guest 2]: I make sure the last 10 minutes
[Guest 2]: I would tell a Ryan Giggs or a David Beckham
[Guest 2]: you've got 5 minutes to go you've got to score
[Guest 2]: a goal only when you practice
[Guest 2]: this high pressure situation you see it in
[Guest 2]: the match whereas for the person who's
[Guest 2]: watching arre yaar ye log solid paanch minute
[Guest 2]: wa bhai iska practice kiya hua
[Guest 2]: so I forget his name
[Guest 2]: it is Bob Bomor who used
[Guest 2]: to be the coach of Phelps he would
[Guest 2]: in the last 10 minutes tell
[Guest 2]: Michael Phelps to swim in the dark
[Guest 2]: he would shut
[Guest 2]: all the lights in the stadium
[Guest 2]: and he said now you
[Guest 2]: swim for half an hour or whatever
[Guest 2]: in the dark and Phelps used to hate that
[Guest 2]: because it used to be disorienting
[Guest 2]: but what Bob Bomor was trying to do is
[Guest 2]: to get Phelps a sense
[Guest 2]: of how big the pool is
[Guest 2]: without seeing anything
[Guest 2]: and that would
[Guest 2]: train his instinct to understand
[Guest 2]: the pool without
[Guest 2]: actually knowing anything around him
[Guest 2]: it would give him a sense of how the pool
[Guest 2]: works and imagine Sydney
[Guest 2]: Olympics the 8th Olympic
[Guest 2]: medal he was disoriented in that
[Guest 2]: particular race his goggles
[Guest 2]: were full of water and he did
[Guest 2]: the last 50 or 70 meters
[Guest 2]: or whatever without seeing
[Guest 2]: and he got the gold medal
[Guest 2]: so for me this
[Guest 2]: is a fabulous story of purposeful
[Guest 2]: practice or for that matter visualization
[Guest 2]: where you actually
[Guest 2]: have lived that moment 100
[Guest 2]: times but for the audience
[Guest 2]: it is like he couldn't see it
[Guest 2]: but still he won and I think
[Guest 2]: Nasir Hussain had said a very
[Guest 2]: interesting story he said that visualization
[Guest 2]: for me was so important that in the
[Guest 2]: ashes I would even visualize
[Guest 2]: what Hayden was sledging to me
[Guest 2]: so that I won't be surprised in the morning
[Guest 2]: and so yeah these were these
[Guest 2]: small small lessons that
[Guest 1]: you keep on learning and every day
[Guest 1]: there is a new lesson
[Amit Varma]: motivational speaker on cricket philosophy
[Amit Varma]: and word
[Amit Varma]: I think by telling him this story
[Amit Varma]: Nasir Hussain is trolling the corporates of India
[Unknown]: because he knows that he will
[Unknown]: reach them
[Unknown]: people will analyze in Crockter and Gamble
[Guest 2]: that how
[Guest 2]: this boss is going to kill me during
[Guest 1]: appraisal
[Guest 1]: even if you visualize it you won't feel bad
[Guest 1]: when you are talking about life
[Guest 1]: lessons or whatever
[Guest 1]: I was listening to Sathya and I was quickly going
[Guest 1]: through some of my notes
[Guest 1]: my note taking thing or whatever
[Guest 1]: and
[Guest 1]: I genuinely feel that frankly
[Guest 1]: if you look back there are some lessons that
[Guest 1]: stay with you and then every day
[Guest 1]: there are new lessons that you find
[Guest 1]: right I mean there is a
[Amit Varma]: film called the swimmers I don't know whether you have
[Amit Varma]: seen it it is just
[Guest 1]: brilliant
[Guest 1]: real life story two Syrian
[Guest 1]: girls whose father
[Guest 1]: was swimming for Syria and then couldn't
[Guest 1]: qualify and put these girls through and then
[Guest 1]: suddenly the Syrian you know the
[Guest 1]: crisis happens in Syria and the girls have to go
[Guest 1]: and become refugees
[Guest 1]: and whatever and you know the film has a motto
[Guest 1]: I don't want to tell people more about the film because you
[Guest 1]: must watch it it is brilliant and it says
[Guest 1]: stay in your lane
[Guest 1]: you know and swim the race
[Guest 1]: so it was you know
[Guest 1]: the first thing that is important is
[Guest 1]: lack of focus
[Guest 1]: just keep your eye
[Guest 1]: on the thing and keep going or whatever
[Guest 1]: and you will see how remarkably it comes out in the film
[Guest 1]: or whatever you know and I just found
[Guest 1]: this to be I just found everything about that film
[Guest 1]: to be so beautiful and then you know me
[Guest 1]: I go down rapid holes I started following both the girls
[Guest 1]: whose lives it was connected with one saying
[Amit Varma]: will you come to smoke and piss
[Amit Varma]: I am like that
[Amit Varma]: Is she coming?
[Guest 1]: Well see now
[Guest 1]: but I will definitely
[Guest 1]: get someone of that caliber I was
[Guest 1]: hoping so you know we get some international stories
[Guest 1]: as well next time
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: this was something that stayed
[Guest 1]: I was watching this show a lot
[Guest 1]: which is currently trending on Netflix
[Guest 1]: I was wondering why is it trending
[Guest 1]: it's a Bihar cop story it's about Diyamit Lodha
[Guest 1]: you know book on
[Guest 1]: killing the biggest
[Guest 1]: criminal of that time and caste politics
[Guest 1]: and everything else which is going on
[Guest 1]: and in the beginning they were travelling in a
[Guest 1]: train it's the first time he is going to Bihar
[Guest 1]: there is an old couple sitting in front of him
[Guest 1]: and the guy turns and says
[Guest 1]: why are you going to Bihar
[Guest 1]: he says to work
[Guest 1]: who goes to work in Bihar
[Guest 1]: and the old man turns and says
[Guest 1]: sir if you are going to work there
[Guest 1]: because he is an IPS officer
[Guest 1]: he says in life
[Guest 1]: you can do two things from Bihar
[Guest 1]: either you can earn a lot of money
[Guest 1]: or you can earn a lot of
[Guest 1]: name and respect now you have to decide
[Guest 1]: what you have to earn
[Guest 1]: and you know one very
[Guest 1]: old jeep ad
[Guest 1]: used to have this jeep on the top of a
[Guest 1]: cliff and I don't
[Guest 1]: know where they were trying to make that correlation
[Guest 1]: or whatever because this whole thing about spirit and
[Guest 1]: blah blah blah but below that was that line which I often
[Guest 1]: quote saying do not
[Guest 1]: mistake your net worth for your self worth
[Guest 1]: and
[Guest 1]: this constant thing nowadays
[Guest 1]: who made it, who made it, where it was made
[Guest 1]: how much it was made, this constant
[Guest 1]: following of these success metrics that are
[Guest 1]: so obsessive
[Guest 1]: somehow I find and I think Vikram
[Guest 1]: and I and a whole bunch of our friends resonate
[Guest 1]: on the fact that it is not
[Guest 1]: our primary driver, I think our
[Guest 1]: primary driver is a lot more about just
[Guest 1]: enriching life, doing things
[Guest 1]: to a very large degree
[Guest 1]: one beautiful lesson that I had
[Guest 1]: in life was Javed
[Guest 1]: we were going to record a song for Colgate
[Guest 1]: and we were crossing the Juhu
[Guest 1]: flyover to go to the highway
[Guest 1]: and then we had to go to film city to shoot
[Guest 1]: and my son had just been born and I was very excited
[Guest 1]: and I turned to him and I said that
[Guest 1]: Javed sahab you know my son and I really
[Guest 1]: want him to read and I really want him to study
[Guest 1]: and you know he should have the right upbringing
[Guest 1]: Ikhlaq hone chahiye acche, jitni
[Guest 1]: mujhe Urdu aati thi main poori use kar raha tha
[Guest 1]: Ikhlaq
[Guest 1]: and Javed sahab just turned and said
[Guest 1]: aap chahate hain woh padhe?
[Guest 1]: padhiye
[Guest 1]: aap chahate hain woh achhi baate kariye?
[Guest 1]: achhi baate kariye?
[Guest 1]: toh kehta hai
[Guest 1]: bachche sheesha hote hain
[Guest 1]: jo dekhte hain
[Guest 1]: usi ko reflect karte hain
[Guest 1]: and then he gave me
[Guest 1]: multiple examples from Bollywood of people
[Guest 1]: he said you know that
[Guest 1]: people who did things and
[Guest 1]: how it reflects
[Guest 1]: and I genuinely find that
[Guest 1]: do not say do
[Guest 1]: and I love you like this, bias for action
[Guest 1]: I keep saying this, ke karo yaar
[Guest 1]: agar duniya mein kisi cheez koi cheez khalti hai
[Guest 1]: toh usko badalne ke liye kuch karo
[Guest 1]: agar koi cheez hai jo fulfill karna hai
[Guest 1]: toh karo toh, page one
[Guest 1]: toh uska complete karo
[Guest 1]: don't keep it just
[Guest 1]: stuck in your mind, that's one thing
[Guest 1]: for sure that I keep telling people
[Guest 1]: and across all
[Guest 1]: the people, I mean you know
[Guest 1]: Bachchan sahab was one of the first people I said I did the interview
[Guest 1]: with, then I did another interview, I worked with him
[Guest 1]: on one or two other projects and whatever
[Guest 1]: even today everyone, there are a hundred stories
[Guest 1]: about Mr. Bachchan, good, bad, all kinds
[Guest 1]: but his punctuality
[Guest 1]: someone everybody will even today talk of
[Guest 1]: because ek work
[Guest 1]: ethic hai, there are so many
[Guest 1]: times that I end up going to functions and stuff
[Guest 1]: and I reach on the given appointed time
[Guest 1]: and I am the earliest person in the place
[Guest 1]: and I am berated by everyone around saying
[Guest 1]: kyun karte ho, kyun jate ho
[Guest 1]: but I just find that
[Guest 1]: keeping a good work ethic
[Guest 1]: and a professional work ethic is a
[Guest 1]: very important thing that
[Guest 1]: somewhere in this jugaad, shortcut
[Guest 1]: let me tell you five life hacks to do the following
[Guest 1]: nahi
[Guest 1]: the simplest hack in the world is
[Guest 1]: put in the work, just put in the work
[Guest 1]: keep putting in the work and it will
[Guest 1]: ultimately
[Guest 1]: bear fruit to that
[Guest 1]: whatever
[Guest 1]: and it's an important thing
[Guest 1]: I think for people to do
[Guest 1]: the other thing that
[Guest 1]: I have actually now
[Guest 1]: started and I think a lot of it
[Guest 1]: is actually realization is
[Guest 1]: Angad Daryani is this boy who I
[Guest 1]: we were doing
[Guest 1]: something for DRGO and we had to
[Guest 1]: get a bunch of, so we do
[Guest 1]: a couple of these culture immersion, so we wanted people
[Guest 1]: from various fields, so Masaba came and spoke about
[Guest 1]: fashion, then we had Ankur coming and
[Guest 1]: talking about music and from Gully
[Guest 1]: Boy to Gehraiya, I mean look at the
[Guest 1]: diversity of those two albums and how he did it
[Guest 1]: fabulous, we had
[Guest 1]: a gender activist who came in called Durga
[Guest 1]: amazing again, great conversation
[Guest 1]: and then we had
[Guest 1]: this boy Angad Daryani, all of
[Guest 1]: 20 something and whatever and
[Guest 1]: Angad has set up a company called
[Guest 1]: Praan and they are actually
[Guest 1]: building these large format
[Guest 1]: filters which, sorry
[Guest 1]: they are actually taking carbon
[Guest 1]: from the atmosphere and in a filterless
[Guest 1]: technology because his logic
[Guest 1]: was that even creating the filter
[Guest 1]: one of the biggest polluting processes
[Guest 1]: is creating the filter which absorbs
[Guest 1]: the carbon, so why can you not have a
[Guest 1]: filterless process which he's
[Guest 1]: built, a very interesting model
[Guest 1]: where you don't have to pay for the machine, you pay per
[Guest 1]: person per month etc and stuff
[Guest 1]: now being adopted by the Tata's
[Guest 1]: just today the government has taken up a lot
[Guest 1]: of this and
[Guest 1]: all brands wanted to know about the metaverse
[Guest 1]: and what's going to happen and whatever
[Guest 1]: so I turned to Angad, what about the metaverse
[Guest 1]: he says let's first save
[Guest 1]: the universe then let's think of the metaverse
[Guest 1]: you know and I genuinely
[Guest 1]: felt that
[Guest 1]: this generation as I say, this generation
[Guest 1]: unafraid, doers
[Guest 1]: you know, really putting
[Guest 1]: themselves out there and
[Guest 1]: he said it in such a simple way that
[Guest 1]: I just carried on that conversation for one
[Guest 1]: hour, it was a beautiful
[Guest 1]: immersion of knowing how they're doing it, why
[Guest 1]: he's doing it and
[Guest 1]: today, like two days later I turned and said
[Guest 1]: anyway I can help you, I'd love to be a part
[Guest 1]: I'm now invested in the company, very very small
[Guest 1]: minuscule amount but I'm invested
[Guest 1]: in him
[Guest 1]: and that idea because that idea for
[Guest 1]: me is a world changing idea, all world
[Guest 1]: changing ideas will not be yours
[Guest 1]: you don't need them to be
[Guest 1]: but if there is somebody else doing that
[Guest 1]: you can either
[Guest 1]: get out of the way
[Guest 1]: or you can actually push them along the way
[Guest 1]: or help them along the way and I genuinely
[Guest 1]: feel that that is so important to do
[Guest 1]: in a hyperconnected world
[Guest 1]: when nobody is unreachable, you know
[Guest 1]: when we wanted to get spoken
[Guest 1]: I once wrote to JK Rowling
[Guest 1]: she replied, she said listen
[Guest 1]: currently I'm not available but I do
[Guest 1]: want to come to India, great
[Guest 1]: we
[Guest 1]: this thing about
[Guest 1]: wishful thinking
[Guest 1]: there is only one life
[Guest 1]: whatever you want to do here
[Guest 1]: you want to learn a hundred new things
[Guest 1]: you want to, it's all
[Guest 1]: available, Prasoon
[Guest 1]: said something very nice at a
[Guest 1]: conference that we attended, he says
[Guest 1]: this generation that you have given
[Guest 1]: a device in which you can do everything
[Guest 1]: you can even create
[Guest 1]: whatever and he gave an example
[Guest 1]: of a mixtape, he says you know many of us
[Guest 1]: grew up as the mixtape generation, right
[Guest 1]: I used to earn money in college by recording mixtapes
[Guest 1]: with voiceovers in between and
[Guest 1]: poetry I used to write
[Guest 1]: everybody was love-loving
[Guest 1]: everyone had tears
[Guest 1]: in that conversation he said, you know we used to
[Guest 1]: measure the exact amount of time
[Guest 1]: in that tape, 45 minutes
[Guest 1]: there would be a calculation you would
[Guest 1]: do of saying this song is of 8 minutes
[Guest 1]: this is of 6, if we add 6 and 8
[Guest 1]: and 5 and 7 then
[Guest 1]: 45 will come and you would do that
[Guest 1]: permutation combination and then do that recording
[Guest 1]: that importance of
[Guest 1]: choice and curation
[Guest 1]: was so much
[Guest 1]: that you curated that, you took
[Guest 1]: the effort and that effort
[Guest 1]: made you value that object
[Guest 1]: limitless choice
[Guest 1]: is killing that
[Guest 1]: to a certain degree, algorithmic choices
[Guest 1]: when Spotify Unwrapped came out
[Guest 1]: there was a huge thing, everybody posted
[Guest 1]: and then a bunch of people posted
[Guest 1]: what they said, Unwrapped did not come
[Guest 1]: we just said, what about natural
[Guest 1]: selection, what about just going and finding something
[Guest 1]: unique, what about discovering something
[Guest 1]: and I am trying to do a festival around this in February
[Guest 1]: next year, you know building around
[Guest 1]: this entire concept
[Guest 1]: but I just think that it is
[Guest 1]: important and Prasoon was saying was
[Guest 1]: limitless choice and the option
[Guest 1]: of limitless creation
[Guest 1]: he says, beside the record button
[Guest 1]: there should be a bigger pause button
[Guest 1]: so that you don't
[Guest 1]: put up everything you think
[Guest 1]: I am a little scared
[Guest 1]: of the amount of
[Guest 1]: problem solvers that are available
[Guest 1]: on your feed of everything
[Guest 1]: every well talking
[Guest 1]: semi good looking person is a
[Guest 1]: friend, philosopher, guide, making money
[Guest 1]: when they really don't have knowledge
[Guest 1]: as a base sometimes, so
[Guest 1]: somewhere I think that this mass
[Guest 1]: consumption, mass creation
[Guest 1]: is both a solution and a
[Guest 1]: problem at some level but I really feel that
[Guest 1]: the world needs a lot more of curation at that level
[Guest 1]: as well and before you
[Guest 1]: record, before you write
[Guest 1]: press that pause button and think for a bit
[Amit Varma]: is an equally important bit.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of questions
[Amit Varma]: based on that before we go back to
[Amit Varma]: cricket lessons and life lessons
[Amit Varma]: from Vikram, which is
[Amit Varma]: number one, of course it is a great advantage
[Amit Varma]: that the youth of today have
[Amit Varma]: the world at their fingertips, like I was just
[Amit Varma]: in the break I was telling Vikram about Robert Sipolsky's
[Amit Varma]: great biology lectures on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: and how we never had anything
[Amit Varma]: like that at our disposal in the 80s
[Amit Varma]: when we were in school and college
[Amit Varma]: but the flip side is
[Amit Varma]: that the mode of how you
[Amit Varma]: experience a world has become
[Amit Varma]: much more, sort of
[Amit Varma]: much quicker and
[Amit Varma]: you know, you're always
[Amit Varma]: swiping, swiping, scrolling, scrolling
[Amit Varma]: that's the mode, it's
[Amit Varma]: in a sense made for short attention
[Amit Varma]: spans, which I know of course is a cliche
[Amit Varma]: and people do listen to my 7 hour episodes
[Amit Varma]: so it's not all that
[Amit Varma]: but a lot of how we experience a world
[Amit Varma]: is in little slivers
[Amit Varma]: without really going deep, like Jonathan Haidt
[Amit Varma]: once spoke about how despite having all of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: available to us, all of us are consuming
[Amit Varma]: something that was produced in the last
[Amit Varma]: three days, except those listening
[Amit Varma]: to this episode because we are recording at the start
[Amit Varma]: of December and it's releasing later
[Amit Varma]: but you get what I'm saying
[Amit Varma]: so one, there is
[Amit Varma]: that because as a creator
[Amit Varma]: I have, you know, in the past written about
[Amit Varma]: how the form of what you're doing changes the content
[Amit Varma]: changes the character, so because
[Amit Varma]: I do 5 hour episodes or whatever
[Amit Varma]: I have to listen better, I have to keep
[Amit Varma]: my ego out of it because I'm now listening
[Amit Varma]: not to respond but to understand
[Amit Varma]: that makes me a better listener, that makes me more
[Amit Varma]: empathetic and it makes me a different person
[Amit Varma]: if I was doing 5 minute episodes
[Amit Varma]: it would be very different, but that's
[Amit Varma]: as a creator, but even as a consumer
[Amit Varma]: I think that applies, that if every time
[Amit Varma]: I was itchy and
[Amit Varma]: instead of reaching for a smartphone, I picked up a book
[Amit Varma]: and I read that for an hour, instead of
[Amit Varma]: scrolling through Twitter and Facebook and whatever
[Amit Varma]: for an hour, I think I would fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: be a different person
[Amit Varma]: right, so that is sort of
[Amit Varma]: one question about
[Amit Varma]: where the youth of today do
[Amit Varma]: have something tremendous at their disposal
[Amit Varma]: all the knowledge and wisdom of the world
[Amit Varma]: they are also going from immediate
[Amit Varma]: gratification to immediate gratification
[Amit Varma]: one dopamine hit after the other
[Amit Varma]: and the other thing is, earlier when you were talking
[Amit Varma]: about the youth Roshan, you mentioned about how
[Amit Varma]: the kids of today
[Amit Varma]: are evolved in different ways and all of that
[Amit Varma]: and I wonder if there is some selection
[Amit Varma]: bias in that, which has to do with
[Amit Varma]: essentially interacting with a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of English speaking elite in a big city
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, India
[Amit Varma]: is full of multitudes in that sense
[Amit Varma]: and these are
[Amit Varma]: multitudes who are really responding
[Amit Varma]: to incentives and algorithms
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that, if today there is a 15 year old
[Amit Varma]: kid, he gets a video
[Amit Varma]: that this has happened in Bihar
[Amit Varma]: and a cow
[Amit Varma]: has been mistreated or there is an attack
[Amit Varma]: on a temple, and he sees one
[Amit Varma]: video like that, then the algorithm
[Amit Varma]: will make sure he sees more and more
[Amit Varma]: like that, till everything he is getting
[Amit Varma]: is from there, and the odd thing
[Amit Varma]: that he might hear from somewhere else
[Amit Varma]: seems to him to be completely crazy
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't fit, that would be anti-national
[Amit Varma]: what are you saying, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: then they get drawn into those echo chambers
[Amit Varma]: and those are possibly people that we
[Amit Varma]: would never come across, now
[Amit Varma]: both of you have travelled much more than me and you've
[Amit Varma]: actively worked with young people
[Amit Varma]: beyond, you know, whatever little
[Amit Varma]: urban conclaves there might be
[Amit Varma]: so, it's like these two questions in one
[Amit Varma]: really, that what is your sense
[Amit Varma]: of how the quality and texture
[Amit Varma]: of our lives is being affected
[Amit Varma]: by this, because I certainly think that
[Amit Varma]: if I, like, sure
[Amit Varma]: in the childhood, I didn't have all the
[Amit Varma]: knowledge in the world available to me, but instead of reading
[Amit Varma]: all the books I did, if I was scrolling
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter and Insta all the time, I
[Amit Varma]: think I would be a different person, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: I think this generation could be a different generation
[Amit Varma]: not just in terms of
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Guest 1]: No, so I think
[Guest 1]: the
[Guest 1]: fear that, oh my god, the algorithm
[Guest 1]: is going to take you down a rabbit hole
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: I also feel that very often
[Guest 1]: our generation
[Guest 1]: consumes without putting too many filters
[Guest 1]: the younger lot, I must tell you
[Guest 1]: the way they disguise their identity
[Guest 1]: their IPs, the way they shift across
[Guest 1]: platforms, the way they will use
[Guest 1]: a new browser against something else
[Guest 1]: because they realize this is a cleaner browser
[Guest 1]: they are very aware of that identity
[Guest 1]: yeah, do they still get sucked in? Of course
[Amit Varma]: they do. I think the WhatsApp university
[Amit Varma]: is where they actually get sucked in a lot. But I feel these are the
[Amit Varma]: well-educated young people you run into
[Amit Varma]: you know, outside this bubble it might
[Guest 1]: not quite be like that. Yeah, yeah, so see that's what I'm saying
[Guest 1]: the example I gave you of that
[Guest 1]: child who was on the train who turned and said
[Guest 1]: this is my browser and this is my parents'
[Guest 1]: browser, right? He is
[Guest 1]: aware that oh, if he is watching
[Guest 1]: X or whatever, this might throw up something
[Guest 1]: else. They are aware
[Guest 1]: the person in the
[Guest 1]: B and C town right
[Guest 1]: now, I mean there's an amazing
[Guest 1]: study that we were currently looking at which said that
[Guest 1]: this is a generation of vertical invaders
[Guest 1]: they are people who are
[Guest 1]: going to, they don't want to stop for
[Guest 1]: anything on the way, there is no, if this
[Guest 1]: ladder is taking me too long, I'll find a new ladder
[Guest 1]: I may not take a ladder, I might find a pole vault
[Guest 1]: and I'll figure my own way up there
[Guest 1]: so I think they are making their own
[Guest 1]: rules, they are doing it their own way
[Guest 1]: definitely yes
[Guest 1]: there is the
[Guest 1]: WhatsApp part is
[Guest 1]: what I am scared of because I find that to
[Guest 1]: be too controlled and
[Guest 1]: manipulated. Twitter is really not
[Guest 1]: their medium, I mean the younger lot I don't
[Guest 1]: find Twitter to be their medium at all
[Guest 1]: their largest consumption
[Guest 1]: actually currently is
[Guest 1]: on either viewing
[Guest 1]: where they are viewing content so therefore they are seeing
[Guest 1]: long form content, so while there is the
[Guest 1]: real short form content and stuff
[Guest 1]: and when I see the smaller Indian
[Guest 1]: TikTok look alike
[Guest 1]: I genuinely find them to be poor cousins
[Guest 1]: at the moment because what that
[Guest 1]: is doing is next
[Guest 1]: level and there
[Guest 1]: again the choices I see
[Guest 1]: young people make and I am now talking other geographies
[Guest 1]: as well because I travel globally as well
[Guest 1]: and I interact with young people there
[Guest 1]: and many of them are making choices that are very
[Guest 1]: different, I mean the kindest, I saw a lot of
[Guest 1]: activism happening in the Middle East which girls
[Guest 1]: were doing online
[Guest 1]: in smaller groups that they were building. Oh what's happening
[Amit Varma]: in Iran for example. Iran right now right, I mean see
[Guest 1]: today they are saying they are pulling out at morality police
[Guest 1]: in its entirety, what is it
[Guest 1]: I mean a week before they were saying
[Guest 1]: 30,000 people would be killed, you know and
[Guest 1]: it's that that I think
[Guest 1]: these people are aware
[Guest 1]: yes
[Guest 1]: there is a propensity
[Guest 1]: to, but I think their propensity to question
[Guest 1]: is a lot more
[Guest 1]: you know the uncle is a
[Guest 1]: believer beyond whatever
[Guest 1]: you know the whatsapp uncle is
[Guest 1]: but I think the younger lot
[Guest 1]: have a lot more of this questioning ability
[Guest 1]: and I would grant them that plus
[Guest 1]: their peer groups have
[Guest 1]: got, yeah I mean what Nikhil said again
[Guest 1]: I thought was that oh very often
[Guest 1]: in the loneliness of the person they will
[Guest 1]: find these people because at least they feel that they find
[Guest 1]: a group but I assure you
[Guest 1]: that even today universities
[Guest 1]: colleges across the country
[Guest 1]: the discussion which even you
[Guest 1]: used to have in colleges are still alive
[Guest 1]: yeah, they may get
[Guest 1]: colored by a lot of this falsified
[Guest 1]: information, you saw this, you heard that
[Guest 1]: but at least there are still enough viewpoints
[Guest 1]: that exist
[Guest 1]: it's not that everyone is just thinking
[Guest 1]: one particular way, what we must
[Guest 1]: acknowledge is what many of your episodes
[Guest 1]: have acknowledged that we have been sitting in this
[Guest 1]: little belief that we are a socialist
[Guest 1]: equality, egalitarian
[Guest 1]: blah blah blah, secular
[Guest 1]: nahi hai yaar, sach mein nahi hai
[Guest 1]: and when you discover that
[Guest 1]: it's a very bitter pill to swallow
[Guest 1]: particularly for someone from Lucknow
[Guest 1]: because you know, wo Ganga Jamuni Tehzeeb
[Guest 1]: wo language ka
[Guest 1]: you know that evolution of a language
[Guest 1]: which is actually everyone's language today
[Guest 1]: a friend of ours
[Guest 1]: common friend of Sathe and I was asked to
[Guest 1]: write a song for one
[Guest 1]: national initiative and then was told to ask to remove
[Guest 1]: Urdu words, oh my god
[Guest 1]: and make it Hindi
[Guest 1]: and he was so upset, he says, kaise mana sakta ho
[Guest 1]: is shabd ka translation nahi exist karta
[Guest 1]: aur nahi karta, toh aisi bhi
[Guest 1]: cheezein ho rahi hai, par uske reaction
[Guest 1]: mein bohot saare aise log hai
[Guest 1]: jo ki ground level pe
[Guest 1]: hazaaro aise cheezein kar rahe hain
[Guest 1]: aur mujhe lagta hai ki wo pahal ho rahi hai
[Guest 1]: chahe wo Josh Talks ki apne level par kar rahe ho
[Guest 1]: wo apna kar rahe hain, they are building
[Guest 1]: it is their TED equivalent but it is
[Guest 1]: Josh Talks and it's in Hindi and it exists
[Guest 1]: and it's giving you that India
[Guest 1]: there is Lallantop
[Guest 1]: and I'm saying all of these things
[Guest 1]: TVF, yes for all that they've been
[Guest 1]: through or whatever the narratives that they're coming out
[Guest 1]: ek hai wo Hindustan bhi aur mujhe
[Amit Varma]: abhi bhi us Hindustan pe bohot yaqeen hai
[Amit Varma]: Amazing! Aur us Hindustan
[Unknown]: mein cricket bhi hai
[Amit Varma]: cricket bhi hai, let's go back to
[Guest 2]: cricket lessons
[Guest 2]: I think this was a very
[Guest 2]: interesting conversation, I don't have any experience
[Guest 2]: with the young people in terms of what you have
[Guest 2]: but to me I put it in two
[Guest 2]: buckets, one is knowledge, in terms of
[Guest 2]: knowledge exposure as you said
[Guest 2]: Amit, what they are learning from across
[Guest 2]: domains
[Guest 2]: you and me would never have got that
[Guest 2]: exposure, we just did it later on
[Guest 2]: we evolved into that
[Guest 2]: my worry more is on the psychological aspect
[Guest 2]: of it and that's when the BCD
[Guest 2]: town cities come into play
[Guest 2]: what is the impact on that
[Guest 2]: young girl who's watching the
[Guest 2]: affluent Alia Bhatt
[Guest 2]: of the world putting out
[Guest 2]: content and many of my child psychologist
[Guest 2]: friends tell me that
[Guest 2]: every time we meet a young girl
[Guest 2]: who has a mental health issue
[Guest 2]: we know that it's Instagram
[Guest 2]: to me, I am worried
[Guest 2]: I am not worried about knowledge and obviously
[Guest 2]: the fact that in the
[Guest 2]: scrolling, are you deep diving
[Guest 2]: into the subject and are you
[Guest 2]: exploring that subject in totality
[Guest 2]: is something I am a little worried about
[Guest 2]: but people who are interested will still
[Guest 2]: carry on and do it, so I am not worried
[Guest 2]: that their attention span is changing
[Guest 2]: whoever wants to do it will do it
[Guest 2]: but I am really worried on the psychological
[Guest 2]: aspect because you see that on a daily basis
[Guest 2]: and you don't want an intelligent
[Guest 2]: person who has
[Guest 2]: a very little emotional quotient
[Guest 2]: and that combination is
[Guest 2]: actually very dicey because the guy is
[Guest 2]: too smart in his work but
[Guest 2]: unfortunately he is not sorted here and if he is
[Guest 2]: sorted at the EQ level, his output
[Guest 2]: at a knowledge level will also increase
[Guest 2]: and how that balance plays out is something
[Guest 1]: I am not really sure. I will just add to that
[Guest 1]: or whatever because you know I will tell you, pre-pandemic
[Guest 1]: I used to come across a lot of people
[Guest 1]: and one line which we used to use in common very often was
[Guest 1]: that we know in a hyper connected
[Guest 1]: world we are so deeply disconnected
[Guest 1]: internally, you know and the fact
[Guest 1]: is that your
[Guest 1]: social dyslexics was in fact
[Guest 1]: something that I used to turn and keep talking of
[Guest 1]: saying that I met a boy who used to blog
[Guest 1]: beautifully, write beautifully and when he came
[Guest 1]: in person, he was not able to even
[Guest 1]: talk properly and I thought that
[Guest 1]: ultimately schools, colleges
[Guest 1]: were a lot more about social
[Guest 1]: behavior and understanding
[Guest 1]: how to be around people
[Guest 1]: and a lot of these people ultimately
[Guest 1]: don't have that ability
[Guest 1]: or whatever. The pandemic I
[Guest 1]: think actually put a lens to even
[Guest 1]: young people to realize a lot of this
[Guest 1]: the behavior that we are seeing
[Guest 1]: and I am going to talk of a completely different
[Guest 1]: world, you know in the concert
[Guest 1]: and going out space
[Guest 1]: we were very worried that
[Guest 1]: oh this behavior has changed
[Guest 1]: people will want to do everything virtual or whatever
[Guest 1]: complete rubbish. People
[Guest 1]: are spending 5x of
[Guest 1]: what they were spending before but they
[Guest 1]: are a lot more conscious of their choice
[Guest 1]: earlier they would have
[Guest 1]: gone and said let's try 10 things
[Guest 1]: experimentation has
[Guest 1]: decreased, genre
[Guest 1]: definition has become very strong
[Guest 1]: I want to listen to independent music, I will go
[Guest 1]: I want to listen to Daler Mehndi, I will listen to Daler Mehndi
[Guest 1]: I want to listen to Mikka, I will listen to Mikka
[Guest 1]: I will vote with my wallet
[Guest 1]: and they are doing that
[Guest 1]: and doing a lot more of that. In fact
[Guest 1]: it's an under serviced market I believe
[Guest 1]: and people are really stepping out
[Guest 1]: because now they know
[Guest 1]: they are lonely, yes
[Guest 1]: but now they realize it also and I think that
[Guest 1]: they are trying to do enough and more things
[Guest 1]: frankly there should be a lot more things
[Guest 1]: in that space for them to interact
[Guest 1]: the one thing that people are not being
[Guest 1]: able to handle
[Guest 1]: is the empowerment
[Guest 1]: of women
[Guest 1]: women you know have changed
[Guest 1]: that entire gender is a lot more aware
[Guest 1]: they have a lot more opportunities and they are using
[Guest 1]: them and that
[Guest 1]: is creating a certain
[Guest 1]: amount of problems where
[Guest 1]: the coding of that middle class
[Guest 1]: patriarchal coding or whatever and I mean Nikhil's
[Guest 1]: episode says a lot of this, Mahima's episode talks a lot
[Guest 1]: of this so we don't need to go into it in depth
[Guest 1]: but that is where I still believe
[Guest 1]: that there is a lot of friction and people
[Guest 1]: they just don't know what to handle because
[Guest 1]: the other definition which I really resonated
[Guest 1]: with what Nikhil has said
[Guest 1]: that if you want to do everything
[Guest 1]: then why do I need to make that choice
[Guest 1]: why do I only need to do engineering
[Guest 1]: remember that whole bit which was there, I thought it was a lovely bit
[Guest 1]: saying that you told me to make these choices
[Guest 1]: because these were safe bets for earning
[Guest 1]: but now you are also earning so why can't I make
[Guest 1]: crazy killer bets or whatever
[Guest 1]: the other thing I must tell you is that
[Guest 1]: YouTube as the university for learning
[Guest 1]: is a
[Guest 1]: crazy phenomenon
[Guest 1]: somebody who works with me, Siddhartha Garwal
[Guest 1]: his family is in Nainital
[Guest 1]: he has learnt
[Guest 1]: everything
[Guest 1]: on YouTube, his brother
[Guest 1]: is the programming guy for
[Guest 1]: Arijit Singh, learnt music
[Guest 1]: on YouTube, not done a
[Guest 1]: formal course but learnt everything there
[Guest 1]: so for those who really
[Guest 1]: want to learn, I think that this thing
[Guest 1]: about the availability of choice
[Guest 1]: now what is the use of it
[Guest 1]: and this is where I have a problem
[Guest 1]: this thing of becoming
[Guest 1]: luddites or lotus eaters
[Guest 1]: to a certain degree, sitting, sleeping
[Guest 1]: not doing it
[Guest 1]: when the first time I had gone to Kashmir
[Guest 1]: just after mass communication
[Guest 1]: I met one or two
[Guest 1]: people who are very well known
[Guest 1]: in the intellectual circles or whatever
[Guest 1]: over tea and every evening I used to think
[Guest 1]: that this world will change tomorrow morning
[Guest 1]: but it didn't come in the morning
[Guest 1]: then the next day the same discussion
[Guest 1]: used to happen, then the next day
[Guest 1]: it was groundhog day, they were just stuck in that cycle
[Guest 1]: and that's the only place
[Guest 1]: where I believe that if there is over
[Guest 1]: consumption and you are just consuming and not
[Guest 1]: acting, doing things
[Guest 1]: that's the only
[Guest 1]: thing that really worries me at some level
[Guest 1]: but I have loads of faith
[Guest 1]: in this generation, of course
[Guest 1]: there is always friction, wasn't there friction when you were in college
[Guest 1]: I came in from Lucknow and came to Delhi and
[Guest 1]: suddenly I am standing and there is an SFI guy
[Guest 1]: saying politics, decide your life, decide your politics
[Unknown]: but I don't want to decide any politics
[Guest 1]: so you have to, so let's join SFI
[Guest 1]: then he said no no
[Guest 1]: let's do debating, it's that
[Guest 1]: and as long as
[Guest 1]: that spirit of experimentation is alive
[Guest 1]: there is hope
[Guest 1]: and if this world doesn't exist there is always Elon Musk
[Guest 1]: and Mars, let's see
[Amit Varma]: and also
[Amit Varma]: I think it might be a little bit of
[Amit Varma]: you know nostalgia also that
[Amit Varma]: in our time also most people were doing nothing
[Unknown]: you know it was a few people who would
[Guest 2]: take the initiative and do shit
[Guest 2]: most people were doing nothing
[Guest 2]: at least in this time people are consuming
[Amit Varma]: yes in this time there is something
[Amit Varma]: there is a chance but
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: people try to say
[Guest 1]: in our time
[Guest 1]: after college there was theater or cricket
[Guest 1]: we didn't study sports so we used to do theater
[Guest 1]: for 6 hours
[Guest 1]: that was our entertainment, our pool was that
[Guest 1]: our bowling was that, our video
[Guest 2]: market was that, we used to do everything
[Guest 2]: that's why because of physical activity
[Guest 2]: modern endorphins were also good
[Guest 2]: that's why that aspect
[Guest 2]: probably 20, 50, 100 years
[Guest 2]: later they will start
[Guest 2]: getting endorphins from technology
[Guest 2]: we don't know but now this new
[Guest 2]: creature that we have
[Guest 2]: who is born on the internet
[Guest 2]: or born on this device
[Guest 2]: how his or her
[Guest 2]: physical development will take place
[Guest 2]: is I think a big challenge because when you
[Guest 2]: spend 8 hours on the phone
[Guest 2]: what changes will
[Guest 2]: that human body have over the
[Guest 2]: next 20 years is going
[Guest 2]: to be a tricky one while you want to increase
[Guest 2]: the lifespan to 130 years
[Guest 2]: but you've played cricket
[Guest 2]: you've gone out, you've trekked
[Guest 2]: but imagine a generation which is not doing
[Guest 2]: all of that and as you say you want everybody to
[Guest 2]: do something, how will that
[Guest 2]: impact their physical health
[Amit Varma]: is also a challenge. So recently there was like
[Amit Varma]: this when Ronaldo
[Amit Varma]: gave his infamous interview, spoiled brat
[Amit Varma]: useless Ronaldo who is a liability
[Unknown]: to every team he's part of
[Amit Varma]: gave his interview, he was complaining
[Amit Varma]: about the young people in the team
[Amit Varma]: and saying that in our time we used to work
[Amit Varma]: a lot, we used to train a lot
[Amit Varma]: and kind of saying that their whole lifestyle
[Amit Varma]: was completely different and I've heard this in a
[Amit Varma]: cricketing context from some Australian
[Amit Varma]: player, I forget who, you must be knowing this
[Amit Varma]: and must have seen it first hand
[Amit Varma]: you know all the young players are now playing video
[Amit Varma]: games and consoles and their
[Amit Varma]: interests are completely different, the ways they bond
[Amit Varma]: with each other is completely different
[Amit Varma]: so do you see that in
[Amit Varma]: these sports also? I think what Ronaldo's point was
[Amit Varma]: they aren't hungry, they don't you know
[Amit Varma]: for us it is everything, these young people
[Amit Varma]: are just not hungry, they go through the motions
[Amit Varma]: which is absolutely untrue
[Amit Varma]: you know he's a lazy bum who sits in the box
[Guest 2]: and waits for the ball, the rest of them are pressing
[Guest 2]: but apart from that just as a
[Guest 2]: general comment. I mean I would like to say
[Guest 2]: that in the urban setup maybe
[Guest 2]: okay because
[Guest 2]: but as we discussed earlier
[Guest 2]: the guys who want to prove something and they
[Guest 2]: fire in them, they will not show
[Guest 2]: such signs but yes I mean video games and all
[Guest 2]: is normal for players even
[Guest 2]: Dhoni's generation when they went inside
[Guest 2]: they played FIFA and stuff like that but
[Guest 2]: I don't think you know the incentives for the
[Guest 2]: younger guys is pretty interesting and I've
[Guest 2]: seen that in the evolution of Hardik Pandya
[Guest 2]: for example. I mean you look at
[Guest 2]: a Hardik Pandya and I remember
[Guest 2]: him seeing years back in
[Guest 2]: Baroda, look
[Guest 2]: at his transformation and that's
[Guest 2]: what exposure can do right? Today
[Guest 2]: the captain of Lucknow
[Guest 2]: he's led the team beautifully
[Guest 2]: because native intelligence in these guys is a lot
[Guest 2]: if he gets a channel
[Guest 2]: then his intelligence
[Guest 2]: is way ahead of the urban intelligence
[Guest 2]: so the hunger definitely is there
[Guest 2]: I don't know what Ronaldo is talking about because
[Guest 2]: Europe is a different ball game, in Europe
[Guest 2]: no one works so maybe in his context
[Guest 2]: he might be right that
[Guest 2]: you know I was watching a test match in Nottingham
[Guest 2]: years back and
[Guest 2]: there was this English teacher sitting next to
[Guest 2]: me and we were talking
[Guest 2]: and I said what's happening in education
[Guest 2]: and what do you teach and he was teaching
[Guest 2]: in a school in Nottingham, he said
[Guest 2]: how do you communicate
[Guest 2]: with the young kids? He said Vikram the biggest
[Guest 2]: communication I have to do
[Guest 2]: with young children in Britain
[Guest 2]: is to tell them that you have to
[Guest 2]: work for a living
[Guest 2]: so I said why?
[Guest 2]: You have to understand he's seen his dad
[Amit Varma]: in front of the television
[Guest 2]: with his beer in hand, he's seen his grandfather
[Guest 2]: do the same, now there is
[Guest 2]: a teacher like me who's telling them brother you have
[Guest 2]: to work, otherwise
[Guest 2]: you won't get any salary or you won't get
[Guest 2]: that telly life that your father's, so he's
[Guest 2]: saying that the challenge is different in Europe
[Guest 2]: but in our case it's not that, this might
[Guest 2]: become in pockets in urban India
[Guest 2]: but still kids have to work
[Guest 2]: and I think after IPL
[Guest 2]: that incentive
[Guest 2]: and Hardik Pandya came to know that
[Guest 2]: this is my lifestyle to maintain
[Guest 2]: I have to go to gym for 6 hours
[Guest 2]: it's amazing how
[Guest 2]: material wealth also drives many of these
[Guest 1]: in a good way also
[Guest 1]: he went through his
[Guest 1]: Juhu phase also with coffee
[Guest 2]: with Karan, no but you know
[Unknown]: I'll tell you what, that
[Unknown]: he's still there but
[Guest 2]: the evolution and understanding that
[Guest 2]: boss next time when I'm going to coffee with Karan
[Guest 2]: I don't think it's Hardik Pandya's fault
[Guest 2]: it's Karan Johar's fault
[Guest 2]: so the thing is that
[Guest 2]: he's a 24-25 year old boy
[Guest 1]: you make him look cool
[Guest 2]: exactly
[Guest 2]: and look at his lens
[Guest 2]: if I abuse him in English
[Guest 2]: it's cool, if I abuse him in Hindi
[Guest 2]: you'll say I had a great time with this chick
[Guest 2]: cool, what a guy
[Guest 2]: if I abuse him in Hindi
[Guest 2]: you'll say I had a great time with this chick
[Guest 2]: same right, I had a good time
[Guest 2]: with this girl that night
[Guest 2]: but the thing is that if we speak in Hindi
[Guest 2]: it becomes down market, if we speak in English
[Guest 2]: it becomes cool, so I think the Karan Johar
[Guest 2]: dynamics was that he understood it
[Unknown]: and see what his journey is
[Guest 2]: to come out of a back injury and be
[Guest 2]: playing the way he does is amazing
[Guest 2]: and work ethics again
[Guest 2]: you spoke about work ethics
[Guest 2]: I think some of these guys just
[Guest 2]: are amazing, their work ethics
[Guest 2]: the priorities at T20 cricket
[Guest 2]: what can you do about it, I mean that is because of
[Guest 2]: the economic set play, you suddenly make
[Guest 2]: more, I mean it's a very simple problem to
[Guest 2]: solve, I always tell anybody from BCCI
[Guest 2]: that make marquee test tournaments and
[Guest 2]: pay Cheteshwar Pujara 20 crore rupees
[Guest 2]: Hardik Pandey will also start playing test cricket
[Guest 2]: the problem is you have to change
[Amit Varma]: your incentives accordingly, I actually think
[Amit Varma]: that you know Hardik's injury was unfortunate
[Amit Varma]: because he was at that time in the
[Amit Varma]: test team as a number 6, I think he'll be a great
[Guest 2]: test player, I don't think he needs to do
[Guest 2]: anything differently, but Amit the problem is
[Guest 2]: that he wants to prioritize it to
[Guest 2]: T20 cricket because now
[Guest 2]: you, a player knows that boss
[Amit Varma]: I have 6-8 years, he's my thinking right
[Guest 2]: 6-8 years, you keep ROI
[Amit Varma]: more than T20 and I don't blame him
[Unknown]: Sir, he should meet with Roshan and hear this
[Amit Varma]: 120 years funda
[Amit Varma]: then he'll play test cricket so much
[Amit Varma]: because he has a lot of time, but you know
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't make a value
[Amit Varma]: judgment there, there are separate sports
[Guest 2]: where he has decided to excel in one
[Guest 2]: and there is only one thing about this boss
[Guest 2]: like Europe has cracked it
[Guest 2]: that boss
[Guest 2]: we have to keep opera alive
[Guest 2]: we have to keep the parallel theatre alive
[Guest 2]: they will get a show
[Guest 2]: they will get 100 shows, state should fund
[Guest 2]: state's work
[Guest 2]: culture ministry has only one
[Guest 2]: work, the culture that is dying
[Guest 2]: keep giving money to it, rest you don't have to
[Guest 2]: do anything, once you have
[Guest 2]: empowered 40 directors of parallel theatre
[Guest 2]: and told them
[Guest 2]: that I will fund one play of yours
[Guest 2]: every year, those 40 plays will be made
[Guest 2]: and people will come to watch
[Guest 2]: but the problem is that CAPEX is not solved
[Guest 2]: and their livelihood is not solved
[Guest 2]: state should not make plays
[Guest 2]: but they should just fund a dying art
[Guest 2]: and that's what is happening
[Guest 2]: BCCI has 5 billion dollars in the bank
[Guest 2]: they have just to create marquee test
[Guest 2]: matches and the guys
[Guest 2]: who are playing test cricket have to be
[Guest 2]: paid equal to IPL
[Guest 2]: and you have the money, it's not
[Guest 2]: that you have to get the money, you say
[Guest 2]: that Pujara you will play this thing but you will get
[Guest 2]: your 10 crores, which you are missing out on IPL
[Guest 2]: unless you incentivize
[Guest 2]: test cricket, why will Hardik Pandya play
[Amit Varma]: test cricket? Yeah but my question is that you are making
[Amit Varma]: an implicit value judgment here by saying
[Amit Varma]: that test cricket is superior to T20
[Guest 2]: so you should incentivize it
[Guest 2]: I am saying why? I am just
[Guest 2]: saying that 3 forms are very high
[Guest 2]: given a choice, this is my personal opinion
[Guest 1]: 3 forms
[Guest 1]: 3 forms of cricket, no I am saying there should be
[Guest 2]: 2, there should be 2 forms of cricket
[Guest 2]: one you keep Bollywood
[Guest 1]: music which is T20 cricket
[Guest 2]: which is a great format everybody enjoys
[Guest 2]: one you keep as whatever
[Guest 2]: as we discussed in this thing
[Guest 2]: there is chess which can't
[Guest 2]: go to 8 billion people so there are good art forms
[Guest 2]: which have to be kept but
[Guest 2]: chess has to become viable
[Guest 2]: and you have an organization
[Amit Varma]: which can make test cricket viable
[Amit Varma]: what I would say is that first of all chess chess
[Unknown]: as it happens
[Amit Varma]: first of all what I would say is that chess chess
[Amit Varma]: like actual chess not in this metaphor
[Guest 2]: is viable today
[Guest 2]: I am sorry bad example
[Amit Varma]: number 2 what I would say is that no I disagree with you
[Amit Varma]: I don't think T20 is Bollywood music
[Amit Varma]: T20 and
[Amit Varma]: test cricket are different sports in the same way
[Amit Varma]: badminton and TT are separate sports
[Amit Varma]: badminton and tennis are separate sports
[Amit Varma]: something similar like racket is there, net is there
[Amit Varma]: you are hitting from it
[Amit Varma]: but they are actually separate sports
[Amit Varma]: I will not make a value judgment and say
[Amit Varma]: one is mass and one is class
[Amit Varma]: that's not my scene, I am perfectly happy with the
[Amit Varma]: BCCI keeping test cricket alive
[Amit Varma]: I mean T20s are basically subsidizing test cricket
[Amit Varma]: I am happy with that out of nostalgia
[Amit Varma]: but to incentivize them
[Amit Varma]: artificially to the level
[Amit Varma]: where people there get the same
[Amit Varma]: kind of money, I don't see
[Amit Varma]: you know why, it depends on whose skills are
[Amit Varma]: in demand
[Amit Varma]: like if you think about it a T20
[Amit Varma]: game for example is much much longer
[Amit Varma]: than a football game
[Amit Varma]: you know why aren't you looking at
[Amit Varma]: football through the same lens, why aren't you saying
[Amit Varma]: match 3 day football
[Amit Varma]: this is my personal opinion
[Guest 2]: this is my purely personal
[Guest 2]: opinion because just like I like T20
[Guest 2]: cricket, I find test cricket more
[Guest 2]: engrossing, this is my personal opinion
[Guest 2]: because I get more out of a
[Guest 2]: session in test cricket
[Guest 2]: again, this is not my value judgment
[Guest 2]: on the entire, but therefore it is in
[Guest 2]: my interest, personal interest to
[Guest 2]: keep two formats alive
[Guest 2]: one format is on
[Guest 2]: probably based on market economics, it will be alive
[Guest 2]: for the next 20 years at least, till the time
[Guest 2]: a T10 comes and replaces T20 cricket
[Guest 2]: and I think there is a lot of potential in
[Guest 2]: T10 cricket also, but that's a separate
[Guest 2]: thing, but given a choice personally
[Guest 2]: I would like Indian classical music
[Guest 2]: also, classical musician
[Guest 2]: who currently is worried about surviving
[Guest 2]: to not get Arijit Singh's
[Guest 2]: 2 crore per concert, but at least
[Guest 2]: get 5 lakh rupees, so I am not saying
[Guest 2]: 10 crores to 10 crores, but I am saying
[Guest 2]: keep it, I like it here
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you, but my
[Amit Varma]: feeling is that
[Amit Varma]: you know Indian classical music is
[Amit Varma]: alive because of Indian classical
[Amit Varma]: lovers who are still paying money to go
[Amit Varma]: to concerts and buy records and do all of that
[Amit Varma]: so I think Test Cricket will stay alive the same
[Amit Varma]: way, I hope so
[Guest 1]: yeah, I am certain
[Guest 1]: also you see again, I look at this
[Guest 1]: podcast again, for example everybody
[Guest 1]: podcasting, podcasting globally
[Guest 1]: in America, podcasting
[Guest 1]: in this million plus listens
[Guest 1]: which is not there in India
[Guest 1]: and people keep giving this bullshit of
[Guest 1]: I have got so many listens and I have got so many listens and whatever
[Guest 1]: and I track this just generally because of
[Guest 1]: interest in the space and I
[Guest 1]: keep saying that boss, it's not a viable
[Guest 1]: medium if you try to do advertising
[Guest 1]: funded, it is viable
[Guest 1]: the way he is doing it, saying you like my
[Guest 1]: podcast, you know pay me enough
[Guest 1]: either pay me for a coffee, very subtly he puts
[Guest 1]: a coffee or a, what do you say, what meal
[Amit Varma]: a hearty lunch, I don't even
[Guest 1]: advertise it anymore, but enough comes in
[Guest 1]: but it comes in obviously, and sell your other
[Guest 1]: products on it, right and you are selling your other
[Guest 1]: products, he has built this little
[Guest 1]: economy around himself which is there
[Guest 1]: is it enough for
[Guest 1]: him to survive, definitely, right
[Guest 1]: similarly with TestKillKit
[Guest 1]: there should be an economy and
[Guest 2]: X number of people who enjoy it will like it
[Guest 2]: similarly classical music
[Guest 2]: that's what I tell all the marketers also
[Guest 2]: that every time you go and sell
[Guest 2]: a concept to a marketer, the
[Guest 2]: marketer is basing the
[Guest 2]: money given to you based on
[Guest 2]: impressions, so I one day
[Guest 2]: explained to a head of marketing that
[Guest 2]: you have to understand that the highest
[Guest 2]: selling item on the internet is pornography
[Guest 2]: pornography drove the internet
[Guest 2]: but that doesn't
[Guest 2]: mean that a show where
[Guest 2]: you are showing fully clothed people
[Guest 2]: talking about a certain
[Guest 2]: issue is not
[Guest 2]: good enough, you cannot compete with
[Guest 2]: pornography and I am saying even violence
[Guest 2]: also just like OTT we are discussing
[Guest 2]: that right, but as long as the
[Guest 2]: head of marketing understand that these
[Guest 2]: 50,000 views are also
[Guest 2]: important from the product point
[Guest 2]: of view and these 20 million
[Guest 2]: people, I will not be able to give you that
[Guest 2]: but today if you go
[Guest 2]: to a company which is even selling
[Guest 2]: to those 50,000 people
[Guest 2]: they are also wanting to go
[Guest 2]: with an influencer who has 10 million
[Unknown]: followers because the marketing
[Guest 2]: because the marketing head says
[Guest 2]: I did 4 influencers
[Guest 2]: they have 50 million
[Guest 2]: so they didn't come yet, that
[Guest 2]: is what I am worried about
[Guest 2]: the guys have to take a call
[Guest 2]: I am saying if you are paying 10 rupees to this guy
[Guest 2]: pay 2 rupees at least to this guy
[Guest 2]: otherwise this content will never come out
[Amit Varma]: Ok, two things, one is
[Amit Varma]: I think that a lot of the people who tell me
[Amit Varma]: we love test cricket, don't watch test cricket
[Amit Varma]: if they watched it, this problem would be solved on its
[Amit Varma]: own, so I think that's where
[Amit Varma]: the 2 rupees will come from, from the voluntary
[Guest 2]: actions of people. I think just to
[Guest 2]: interrupt you here, the younger generation
[Guest 2]: does not watch test cricket
[Guest 2]: that's my personal experience, my sample size
[Guest 2]: that I have watched, but today in England
[Guest 2]: when I say again
[Guest 2]: somebody might say that statistics
[Guest 2]: shows that in the last ashes test
[Guest 2]: 40% of the crowd, no
[Guest 2]: I am saying purely my
[Guest 2]: observation over the last 8 years
[Guest 2]: watching test cricket is that they don't come
[Guest 2]: our 42
[Guest 2]: onwards
[Guest 2]: these people come to watch test cricket
[Guest 2]: and this will slowly decrease
[Guest 2]: because the game of brands will be
[Guest 2]: dependent on 15 to 34
[Guest 2]: as ex-marketers we would know
[Guest 2]: that all money is spent between
[Guest 2]: this segment, unless it's a brand that
[Guest 2]: caters only for the top segment
[Guest 2]: because that also they say that if 15
[Guest 2]: to 34 accepts it,
[Guest 2]: it's shadow falls on the upper
[Guest 2]: segment as well, so from that perspective
[Guest 1]: test cricket will suffer.
[Guest 1]: But you know going back to what Amit said earlier
[Guest 1]: that younger people have time and
[Guest 1]: less money, older people have got
[Guest 1]: money and less time or whatever
[Guest 1]: and that bias can actually
[Guest 1]: be programmed into doing things
[Guest 1]: see, if you built more
[Guest 1]: limit test viewing for 10,000
[Guest 1]: people, but intimate, right
[Guest 1]: but people don't solve, people want
[Guest 1]: the same size fits all, in the same stadium
[Guest 1]: they want to play cricket, right
[Guest 1]: when I watched my, I hated cricket
[Guest 1]: because in Lucknow going and sitting on a bench
[Guest 1]: and warming your ass was something you didn't
[Guest 1]: want to do for things you couldn't see
[Guest 1]: now you go to South Africa
[Guest 1]: the first time I went during, you know when we were
[Guest 1]: doing the ultra tech events or whatever and we went down
[Guest 1]: and it was just a joy to see the thing
[Guest 1]: and I said it feels good to go here, then here
[Guest 1]: we do IPL work, god save us
[Guest 1]: but you go to the newer stadiums
[Guest 1]: you feel it's better, so I think people
[Guest 1]: product has to be redesigned
[Guest 1]: that's the problem, people don't do that
[Guest 1]: and I'm saying, you know
[Guest 1]: the concerts for Floyd
[Guest 1]: the concerts which are
[Guest 1]: harkening back to Woodstock are selling
[Guest 1]: more, making more money
[Guest 1]: people just don't
[Guest 1]: package a great show with one or
[Guest 1]: two of these people right and see what will happen
[Guest 1]: but that creating
[Guest 1]: experiences
[Guest 1]: you know, again this was a
[Guest 1]: conversation that we were having earlier that oh the only
[Guest 1]: artist in India who sell is you know
[Guest 1]: Arjeet and there's Ya Rehman and maybe
[Guest 1]: one or two others or whatever, not true
[Guest 1]: they sell the most
[Guest 1]: now and Anumita Nadesan is a girl
[Guest 1]: who's just started
[Guest 1]: she attracted about a thousand
[Guest 1]: plus people I think on every show that she's doing
[Guest 1]: build a show which is for a thousand people
[Guest 1]: build it in a, you know so
[Guest 1]: that is something which people don't do
[Guest 1]: I find that there are so many people
[Guest 1]: who are not creators
[Guest 1]: they are riding a wave
[Guest 1]: right and this is our problem that
[Guest 1]: if you want to be the facilitation
[Guest 1]: economy, the facilitation
[Guest 1]: economy is not the creator economy
[Guest 1]: I keep trying to explain this to
[Guest 1]: every artist management agency which are run by
[Guest 1]: many of our friends, saying yaar value
[Guest 1]: add karo, creator
[Guest 1]: economy, jo create kar raha hai
[Guest 1]: Kusha Kapila is in the Forbes
[Guest 1]: 30 under 30, not
[Guest 1]: for money earned
[Guest 1]: for being one of India's most influential
[Guest 1]: because she is, her brand
[Guest 1]: integrations are so beautiful
[Guest 1]: that you watch that
[Guest 1]: brand integration because the girl has figured out
[Guest 1]: and she doesn't let anybody else control her narrative
[Guest 1]: she's not letting some manager come and say
[Guest 1]: ek popcorn pakal ke aise bol dena
[Guest 1]: won't do it, because she's in
[Guest 1]: control of her narrative, so ye creator
[Guest 1]: economy separated from
[Unknown]: facilitator economy and ye facilitation
[Guest 1]: economy is the
[Amit Varma]: tailor of most of these things
[Amit Varma]: So I have a question for both of you as marketers
[Amit Varma]: but first I want to comment, you said that
[Amit Varma]: aap test match nahi dekhne jaate the
[Amit Varma]: why will you warm your ass on a bench
[Guest 1]: the thing is with your love for extreme temperatures
[Guest 1]: you're now paying to warm your ass
[Guest 1]: Don't worry, now we, but then you should do
[Guest 1]: test cricket in extreme temperatures
[Guest 2]: Test cricket in extreme temperatures
[Guest 2]: or after watching test cricket in Lucknow
[Amit Varma]: you can go watch Ice Hot Team
[Amit Varma]: warm your ass, cool
[Guest 1]: your ass down, soon you don't know where your ass is
[Guest 1]: Oh yeah, ass from your elbow
[Guest 1]: and kindly
[Guest 1]: refer to Amit's
[Amit Varma]: I boiled my bottoms
[Amit Varma]: I boiled my buttocks
[Amit Varma]: I will duly post that
[Amit Varma]: So my question for you as marketers is this
[Amit Varma]: and this in a sense feeds
[Amit Varma]: into the ODI, the T20
[Amit Varma]: test match argument, is that
[Amit Varma]: just in the creator economy, I think one thing
[Amit Varma]: that advertisers and marketing people
[Amit Varma]: simply haven't figured out is
[Amit Varma]: in terms of metrics, how do you
[Amit Varma]: distinguish from high numbers with low engagement
[Amit Varma]: with relatively less numbers
[Unknown]: with high engagement, for example
[Amit Varma]: I say, and I think any podcaster would really say
[Amit Varma]: that I would rather have a 100,000
[Amit Varma]: people listen to an episode than
[Amit Varma]: 20 million people view a video
[Amit Varma]: that I put on YouTube, because a video
[Amit Varma]: your average engagement time might be
[Amit Varma]: 15 seconds, here for example an average
[Amit Varma]: session is 40 minutes and people listen
[Amit Varma]: over multiple sessions, so the engagement
[Amit Varma]: here is insanely
[Amit Varma]: off the charts, and luckily
[Amit Varma]: because I have figured out a way to monetize
[Amit Varma]: that directly from listeners
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's cool
[Amit Varma]: but advertisers simply haven't figured that
[Amit Varma]: out, I mean why
[Amit Varma]: you know, why is that
[Amit Varma]: you know, what's going on here
[Amit Varma]: and that also plays into the
[Amit Varma]: T20 test cricket thing because
[Amit Varma]: the argument then could be
[Amit Varma]: that somebody who watches test cricket
[Amit Varma]: both has a deeper engagement
[Amit Varma]: while watching test cricket and has
[Amit Varma]: more money to spend on it as Roshan pointed out
[Amit Varma]: so you know, one
[Amit Varma]: test cricket viewer could be as
[Amit Varma]: valuable to you as 10 T20 viewers
[Amit Varma]: if you know how to tap
[Guest 2]: into that. Agreed, I mean Roshan
[Guest 2]: would be able to answer this question better
[Guest 2]: because he sells even today
[Guest 2]: as we speak, but my
[Guest 2]: understanding is that yes, they
[Guest 2]: might be doing their metric data analysis
[Guest 2]: and consumer audience surveys
[Guest 2]: and stuff like that, but I think it's lethargy
[Guest 2]: because generally
[Guest 2]: I get a feeling when I talk
[Guest 2]: to brand managers and stuff like that
[Guest 2]: that getting a big
[Guest 2]: celebrity to endorse
[Guest 2]: the product, I mean I have
[Guest 2]: nothing against Baiju's but sometimes I
[Guest 2]: wonder as a marketeer that
[Guest 2]: a guy who is selling
[Guest 2]: what do you call, Zuma Kesari
[Guest 2]: the next ad is Baiju's
[Guest 2]: education, how does that work
[Guest 2]: is there some kind of a methodology
[Guest 2]: and I have nothing against Shah Rukh Khan also
[Guest 2]: but I'm just saying that somewhere
[Guest 2]: I don't understand this brand marketing
[Guest 2]: thing and sometimes I think this is an
[Guest 2]: investor push, make it big
[Guest 2]: like Vedantu signed
[Guest 2]: Aamir Khan, like
[Guest 2]: why? If you would have
[Guest 2]: said what has Aamir Khan learnt in
[Guest 2]: his journey as a filmmaker
[Guest 2]: and he would have done a series and that
[Guest 2]: was the reason Vedantu signed on
[Guest 2]: Aamir Khan, I would have said probably this
[Guest 2]: is a good reason why
[Guest 2]: you should sign Aamir Khan, but he is coming and
[Guest 2]: saying take Vedantu's class, so that's
[Guest 2]: the part I don't understand because it's lethargy
[Amit Varma]: So build vehicles of deep engagement
[Guest 2]: No, it's basically my point
[Guest 2]: is that I have given Aamir Khan
[Guest 2]: X number of crores of rupees, he is our brand
[Guest 2]: ambassador, this is a marketing plan
[Guest 2]: versus going deep down
[Guest 2]: understanding what these guys want
[Guest 2]: and maybe telling Vedantu
[Guest 2]: to invest in a podcast like yours
[Guest 2]: because that will have deeper engagement
[Guest 2]: that may not have the economic play as
[Guest 2]: Aamir Khan, but still there would be something
[Guest 2]: but if you go to Vedantu, they'll
[Guest 2]: say no, it's too much
[Guest 2]: of hard work, so I
[Guest 2]: would do a safer option because
[Guest 2]: many a times I have seen that the guy who is
[Guest 2]: working in that company wants to
[Guest 2]: show a successful metric of a
[Guest 2]: great signee and get another job in
[Amit Varma]: the next company, so he can get Aamir Khan
[Amit Varma]: and say yes, 5 lakh views
[Guest 2]: So there is no incentive to
[Guest 2]: brand head to show that
[Guest 2]: I have studied very well
[Guest 2]: and made this so that
[Guest 2]: his company will give me more
[Guest 2]: money, there is an incentive, it's not like that
[Guest 2]: but I think it plays in the long term
[Guest 2]: and it doesn't have that much
[Guest 1]: incentive. So let me
[Amit Varma]: break this down a little because
[Amit Varma]: you are right to a certain degree and I am just
[Amit Varma]: adding to what you are saying. Your right to a certain degree
[Unknown]: means you are completely wrong.
[Guest 2]: No, no, no.
[Guest 2]: How many degrees is there in such an extreme temperature?
[Guest 1]: See, having worked in the
[Guest 1]: marketing space in various
[Guest 1]: avatars from trying to sell radio
[Guest 1]: to TV to events to whatever
[Guest 1]: etc, what I have realized is
[Guest 1]: that 90%, firstly
[Guest 1]: the marketeer's lifespan
[Guest 1]: in company has shrunk from 10 years
[Unknown]: to an average of 2-3 years. Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: When it is down to 2-3 years, there
[Guest 1]: is no long term brand building.
[Guest 1]: Long term brand building is about
[Guest 1]: investing in things that will
[Guest 1]: give you
[Guest 1]: consistent results over
[Guest 1]: a period of time. If you are there for 3 years
[Guest 1]: what do you need? You need to win a couple
[Guest 1]: of awards, you need to keep your
[Guest 1]: quarter job safe, which means
[Guest 1]: what did I achieve in this quarter
[Guest 1]: and any metric can be proven.
[Guest 1]: You torture statistics enough, they will say
[Guest 1]: whatever you want them to say. And you have got
[Guest 1]: experts in media company.
[Guest 1]: Sorry, I will interrupt. I remembered a
[Unknown]: Sidhu line. Yeah. Statistics
[Unknown]: are like mini skirts.
[Unknown]: They reveal more than what you hide.
[Amit Varma]: It may not be his original line
[Amit Varma]: but still. When I used to write in Crick Info
[Unknown]: he stole a line from me.
[Unknown]: I wrote in an article
[Amit Varma]: and I was also too clever
[Amit Varma]: and it's a bad line. I had written something
[Amit Varma]: to the effect of the light at the end of the tunnel
[Amit Varma]: as a torch of a serial killer.
[Amit Varma]: So he killed it in his accent.
[Unknown]: It's the torch of an oncoming train.
[Unknown]: Or something like that.
[Unknown]: And when you are driving with the demons
[Guest 1]: you got to have a long spoon.
[Guest 1]: Seriously what happened
[Guest 1]: is that
[Guest 1]: there is an
[Guest 1]: entire, remember there is a 23,000
[Guest 1]: crore economy which exists
[Guest 1]: on doing the same things because
[Guest 1]: at the end of the day, does the
[Guest 1]: marketing director want surprises?
[Guest 1]: Does the CEO suddenly want a surprise?
[Guest 1]: What did you do? There are so
[Guest 1]: many articles I read about where is brave
[Guest 1]: new marketing? Where is the brave new
[Guest 1]: campaign? Imagine the number of celebrity
[Guest 1]: endorsements we see in India
[Guest 1]: during an ad break. Where is the brave
[Guest 1]: new ad? Where is the storytelling ad?
[Guest 1]: And when you see the storytelling
[Guest 1]: ad, it does brilliantly. The Google
[Guest 1]: ad by Ogilvy, the Facebook ad by
[Guest 1]: you know, Aggie.
[Guest 1]: All of these are recent things
[Guest 1]: that I remember. And then of course, just before
[Guest 1]: you'll have something called a flurry of
[Guest 1]: advertising.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: And it's become like, it's called advertising season.
[Guest 1]: People just keep looking for
[Guest 1]: you know, I'm very sorry to say
[Guest 1]: but they actually look out like that. It's horrible.
[Guest 1]: But in that entire thing you're
[Guest 1]: looking for,
[Guest 1]: 80% of
[Guest 1]: the time, I did what everyone else was doing but I did something different.
[Guest 1]: What is the something different? New celebrity,
[Guest 1]: you know,
[Guest 1]: signed a new artist. The number of
[Guest 1]: brands that have come to me saying, you know what we're doing?
[Guest 1]: We're doing a brand revamp and we're doing a new music
[Guest 1]: video. Okay?
[Guest 1]: Why? Because you get the reach of a music video.
[Guest 1]: Why? Because if you play it on T-Series, it's the
[Guest 1]: maximum played YouTube channel in the world.
[Guest 1]: Let's at least see this percentage, sir.
[Guest 1]: This is told to you later. But did you really
[Guest 1]: invest in making a unique video?
[Guest 1]: Did you really get, did you get a, like I mean,
[Guest 1]: there's this lovely director called Reem Sen who's been doing
[Guest 1]: some fabulous work and you see her work or whatever
[Guest 1]: and you know, she did that, you know,
[Guest 1]: that da-da-ding, that lovely,
[Guest 1]: I think it was a Puma commercial that she did or what.
[Guest 1]: Brilliant. But that requires
[Guest 1]: bravery when Piyush, even
[Guest 1]: today, you know, you sit with Piyush, Piyush sir
[Guest 1]: does so much work with us.
[Guest 1]: He says, it's a two-way street.
[Guest 1]: At least discuss, at least create something new.
[Guest 1]: They don't want to do that.
[Guest 1]: The other thing is, if you want to get into the good
[Guest 1]: jobs of a marketeer,
[Guest 1]: is win them an award. Because
[Guest 1]: awards shine on CVs and are
[Guest 1]: very good for getting your next job.
[Guest 1]: Awards, our industry has
[Guest 1]: made so many. I sometimes
[Guest 1]: tell people saying, if you really want to
[Guest 1]: value an award, don't enter so many.
[Guest 1]: Nobody does it. Because everybody wants
[Guest 1]: to see their name somewhere.
[Guest 1]: Right? So, Kanpur,
[Guest 1]: corner, you know,
[Guest 1]: agency, so-and-so awards, I won.
[Guest 1]: It feels good. So,
[Guest 1]: I'm constantly building these
[Guest 1]: safeguards around them.
[Guest 1]: I believe that the brave new marketeer
[Guest 1]: is returning. I'm seeing it. I'm
[Guest 1]: suddenly noticing it. Don't know whether it's a post-pandemic
[Guest 1]: thing. People are taking more risks.
[Guest 1]: People are working with organizations.
[Guest 1]: Maximum number of people
[Guest 1]: advertising today in India are
[Guest 1]: digital companies. Right?
[Guest 1]: They are mostly digital brands. These brands
[Guest 1]: have always dreamed
[Guest 1]: of interacting. Firstly, they
[Guest 1]: dreamt of legitimacy. In India,
[Guest 1]: what's the biggest legitimacy? Standing next to a celebrity.
[Guest 1]: The minute you hire
[Guest 1]: a celebrity for your brand,
[Guest 1]: screw what it does for the brand.
[Guest 1]: The next thing that it does is, you have a picture with the person
[Guest 1]: in your arm and all your relatives say,
[Guest 1]: my son is Avida Bachchan's friend. Exactly.
[Guest 2]: And the CEO should have a photograph with...
[Guest 1]: That's it. That's all they want.
[Guest 1]: The biggest demand is not
[Guest 1]: Sir, in 4 hours, 1 hour
[Guest 1]: ad will be done, 2 hours with the dealer, 1 hour
[Guest 1]: with the CEO's family. What kind of
[Guest 1]: marketing is this? This is not
[Guest 1]: marketing. This is the appeasement of a certain
[Guest 1]: ego. And people
[Guest 1]: endorse this fully. I attend
[Guest 1]: so many of these media events and then
[Guest 1]: I stopped doing it recently
[Guest 1]: because they said that it's the same everywhere.
[Guest 1]: Same conversation,
[Guest 1]: same thing, same set of people, whatever.
[Guest 1]: But really, it will require
[Guest 1]: a bunch of people who will break
[Guest 1]: that. And they do.
[Guest 1]: And again, I mean, you know,
[Guest 1]: TVF has really come back. And I say that
[Guest 1]: because I'm noticing it. You go
[Guest 1]: and say, you know, I want a narrative like TVF.
[Guest 1]: I want something like this
[Guest 1]: one did. I'd like an ad that looks...
[Guest 1]: Then you're...
[Guest 1]: Some change is happening.
[Guest 1]: It's happening with a bunch of creators.
[Guest 1]: And I keep telling people, rather than
[Guest 1]: put all your money behind one
[Guest 1]: idea, put
[Guest 1]: 50% of your money around 20
[Guest 1]: ideas. See which
[Guest 1]: one is working and then pump in the media
[Guest 1]: money to make it big.
[Guest 1]: The remaining 50%, do whatever you
[Guest 1]: want. Let people...
[Guest 1]: Work with new people. This thing of working
[Guest 1]: with agency of record.
[Guest 1]: You know, that concept
[Guest 1]: Oh, because they understood the brand,
[Guest 1]: the agency invested in it.
[Guest 1]: Agencies are so... I mean, they're just so
[Guest 1]: broken down today into functions.
[Guest 1]: So JW was known for strategy.
[Guest 1]: Ogilvy was known for creative. So and so was known for media muscle.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: The young creator today knows so much more.
[Guest 1]: I keep saying that
[Guest 1]: have a culture council. Have people...
[Guest 1]: You know, we were chasing at Commune
[Guest 1]: for a long time. We thought content, content.
[Guest 1]: And pandemic, actually, because the only thing we could do was generate
[Guest 1]: content. So everybody became a
[Guest 1]: content company. I believe every creator
[Guest 1]: is a content company by themselves.
[Guest 1]: But the issue is, what
[Guest 1]: kind of content and in which medium?
[Guest 1]: I realize that our strongest
[Guest 1]: play is live and culture.
[Guest 1]: So I've turned and said,
[Guest 1]: for making great content, I'll hire
[Guest 1]: great people and work with them. And if I
[Guest 1]: even need to put it out beyond the Commune network,
[Guest 1]: I'll find you five great networks which give you efficacy
[Guest 1]: and return. But
[Guest 1]: in live, nobody is able to create
[Guest 1]: the engagement and experience I do,
[Guest 1]: which is why Commune will build far
[Guest 1]: more physical IPs. In
[Guest 1]: culture, because I deal with so many
[Guest 1]: creators of such diverse
[Guest 1]: interests, I am building culture councils
[Guest 1]: and going to brands saying, come,
[Guest 1]: we will be your culture. We'll be a culture
[Guest 1]: lab. We will come and tell you what
[Guest 1]: to do in culture. Who should be executed?
[Guest 1]: No. The best person should
[Guest 1]: be executed. But typical advertising
[Guest 1]: behavior is, do all this with me.
[Guest 1]: I'll make the song, I'll write the ad,
[Guest 1]: I'll do this. It doesn't happen, boss.
[Guest 1]: A lot has changed and to do that,
[Guest 1]: you will need
[Guest 1]: to actually spread
[Guest 1]: your wings higher and
[Guest 1]: ally with a lot more people.
[Guest 1]: Break these big
[Guest 1]: walls that you are doing or whatever. And I'm telling you,
[Guest 1]: it's happening.
[Guest 1]: Marketers really, and
[Guest 1]: some marketers are really waking up to it.
[Guest 1]: I genuinely value them. I value them by
[Guest 1]: giving them more time. I value them by
[Guest 1]: sending my best ideas to them, provoking
[Guest 2]: them. You are making a very important point.
[Guest 2]: The structure of marketing needs to change. Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: That means
[Guest 2]: it has to come from the education of marketing
[Guest 2]: as well.
[Unknown]: Very true.
[Unknown]: So, let's go back to
[Unknown]: cricket lessons and life
[Guest 2]: lessons.
[Amit Varma]: One point that... No, I say very true.
[Amit Varma]: The reason I don't have
[Amit Varma]: a particular response to it is that I think
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of what you said is stuff that I will
[Amit Varma]: re-listen to and process over
[Guest 2]: a period of time and we'll continue this conversation.
[Guest 2]: That was your struggle as well, right?
[Amit Varma]: Selling your content.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't go and sell. No, you don't go and sponsor.
[Amit Varma]: See, what I have really decided
[Amit Varma]: as far as sales is concerned that I won't do it.
[Unknown]: Exactly. I'm a product guy.
[Unknown]: Product is best marketing.
[Unknown]: So, I won't do sales or marketing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, some advertisers come
[Amit Varma]: themselves and
[Amit Varma]: some of them will put a code unseen
[Amit Varma]: and then they will realize that, hey, it's really worked.
[Amit Varma]: So, I get repeat marketing. You know, so, there's this
[Amit Varma]: company called The Great Courses Plus which renamed
[Amit Varma]: themselves Vandrium. So, they advertise with
[Amit Varma]: me for a year and then
[Amit Varma]: last year in September, they said
[Amit Varma]: we want to buy out all your inventory for
[Amit Varma]: 2022. So, I was happy.
[Amit Varma]: I said, okay.
[Amit Varma]: Because they saw that my commercials had worked
[Amit Varma]: for them. But then these RBI
[Amit Varma]: regulations on recurring payments came
[Amit Varma]: in and they changed their mind
[Amit Varma]: because they said that now the client is saying
[Amit Varma]: that all the customers
[Amit Varma]: in India, they probably
[Amit Varma]: won't be able to pay anyway. So, let us
[Amit Varma]: suspend it. We'll discuss it when the problem is
[Amit Varma]: resolved. So, I lost a massive
[Amit Varma]: chunk of money because of the freaking RBI.
[Guest 2]: But that's
[Guest 2]: okay. I mean, the way...
[Guest 2]: Roshan, give him a 10% stake.
[Unknown]: I'll give Roshan a 10% stake.
[Unknown]: Roshan will ask, what's the value?
[Amit Varma]: I'll say, sir, what can the value be?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but
[Amit Varma]: my story is, I love what I'm doing. It's a
[Amit Varma]: labor of love. Whatever comes in
[Amit Varma]: is a kind of a bonus. But I've always been very
[Guest 1]: impractical. I'm going to throw that back
[Guest 1]: at you in terms of saying, what are some lessons
[Guest 1]: that you have picked up? Because you are
[Guest 1]: interacting every week with such
[Guest 1]: wonderful people that
[Guest 1]: if I was to say, what are five lessons
[Guest 1]: that you have picked up? And
[Guest 1]: I couldn't say it over 300 episodes.
[Guest 1]: But what would you say over
[Guest 1]: this year? Over all of
[Amit Varma]: 2022? So, at the
[Amit Varma]: end of the episode, we were going to have this section where we all
[Amit Varma]: give advice to youngsters and I had a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of points for that. But I won't look at that.
[Amit Varma]: I would rather, like, since you asked me,
[Amit Varma]: I think I've learned to
[Amit Varma]: listen better,
[Amit Varma]: become a better
[Amit Varma]: listener. I've learned to be a little bit...
[Amit Varma]: I've learned to be less judgmental,
[Amit Varma]: which is very important. But that's
[Amit Varma]: more a life lesson that I think just comes
[Amit Varma]: with growing older and not necessarily because
[Amit Varma]: of the show.
[Amit Varma]: But I've also learned,
[Amit Varma]: over the last year, especially as I've done
[Amit Varma]: these long oral history kind of
[Amit Varma]: episodes, is that
[Amit Varma]: what I really like best is the stories
[Amit Varma]: of people. The stories that
[Amit Varma]: people tell about themselves. And I find many
[Amit Varma]: of my listeners will echo this and some won't.
[Amit Varma]: Where, you know, my thing
[Amit Varma]: is, if you want to listen to subject X
[Amit Varma]: on... to person X
[Unknown]: on subject Y, you can search
[Amit Varma]: on YouTube. You'll find thousands.
[Amit Varma]: But if you really want to understand
[Amit Varma]: someone's life, how they grew up,
[Amit Varma]: their vulnerabilities, their insecurities,
[Amit Varma]: their turning points, you don't really
[Amit Varma]: get that anywhere else. Just
[Amit Varma]: that personal touch. Like Ninal Pandey
[Amit Varma]: came on the show and I asked my
[Amit Varma]: first question about her childhood. She spoke for
[Unknown]: one hour, ten minutes. She spoke
[Amit Varma]: for one hour, ten minutes and she took
[Amit Varma]: me from the 50s to the 70s. She
[Amit Varma]: covered 30 years and it was
[Amit Varma]: magical. Talking about her
[Amit Varma]: mother, talking about her sister, talking
[Amit Varma]: about her early childhood years.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the first time they were at a balcony and
[Amit Varma]: a group of people were going past in the early
[Amit Varma]: 50s and she asked her mother,
[Amit Varma]: what is that? Or her grandmother, what are
[Amit Varma]: these people? And the grandmother
[Amit Varma]: said, Re-pu-jis.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and she repeats it like that to me
[Amit Varma]: 70 years later. And
[Amit Varma]: for me, those moments are magical
[Amit Varma]: when you have a person
[Amit Varma]: revealing themselves. Like Nikhil did so much
[Amit Varma]: in his episode. Nikhil Taneja,
[Amit Varma]: The Loneliness of the Indian Man. And I think
[Amit Varma]: that, for me, that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of special. Just listening to these
[Amit Varma]: and these human connections.
[Amit Varma]: And many of my listeners agree, you know.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure I've lost
[Amit Varma]: some listeners because I don't do two hour
[Amit Varma]: deep dives into subjects, I do five hour deep
[Amit Varma]: dives into people. But that's just
[Amit Varma]: a direction that I like to go
[Amit Varma]: and I think that's kind of
[Amit Varma]: value to me. And I'm wondering
[Amit Varma]: if that's also
[Amit Varma]: something that happened with you
[Amit Varma]: Vikram, in the course of, as we get back to your
[Amit Varma]: cricket lessons, but in the course of your
[Amit Varma]: interacting with cricket,
[Amit Varma]: where at one level
[Amit Varma]: when you go into it, you
[Amit Varma]: see that these guys are almost larger
[Amit Varma]: than life, right? Tendulkar,
[Amit Varma]: Dravid, Kumle. I mean, they're just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I still remember Kumle with
[Amit Varma]: you know, we were doing live
[Amit Varma]: bulletins for a test match in the West Indies
[Amit Varma]: where he broke his jaw and he went out to bowl with
[Amit Varma]: that, you know. And that makes him so
[Amit Varma]: much larger than life. But then you're responding to
[Amit Varma]: them as people and you're seeing their frailties
[Amit Varma]: and their weaknesses and you're learning
[Amit Varma]: lessons from that, which of course we'll go back to
[Amit Varma]: now. But what has been
[Amit Varma]: your sense through this time
[Amit Varma]: of relating to people as people? And the reason
[Amit Varma]: I ask that is that I think
[Amit Varma]: what I did when I was younger,
[Amit Varma]: and I don't want to generalize about whether young people
[Amit Varma]: do it, but I think all people do it to an extent,
[Amit Varma]: is that you are the
[Amit Varma]: center of the world, right?
[Amit Varma]: You are the, you're playing the lead role
[Amit Varma]: in the play in your head. Everybody
[Amit Varma]: else is a prop or a side character, but
[Amit Varma]: you are everything. You look at people
[Amit Varma]: only in the sense that they are instrumental
[Amit Varma]: to you or they are important for your story,
[Amit Varma]: but not as people themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And then I think what I have
[Amit Varma]: learnt most of all through my journey
[Amit Varma]: is to just have
[Amit Varma]: that humility and to respond to
[Amit Varma]: people as people, which obviously
[Amit Varma]: listening to their stories
[Amit Varma]: helps me do a lot. So how has that
[Guest 2]: journey been for you guys? Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: And the joy that you
[Guest 2]: get unraveling people and
[Guest 2]: kind of understanding
[Guest 2]: their stories is exactly the joy
[Guest 2]: I got in the journey of covering cricket
[Guest 2]: is because
[Guest 2]: when you meet people who you
[Guest 2]: admire because of the nature of the profession
[Guest 2]: they are in, you realize that
[Guest 2]: you in your normal
[Guest 2]: life are noticing people
[Guest 2]: in relatively low pressure
[Guest 2]: zones. But sport
[Guest 2]: is, it's gladiatorial,
[Guest 2]: right? You notice people in high
[Guest 2]: pressure zones. And unlike
[Guest 2]: your profession,
[Guest 2]: that is why, what is the most exciting
[Guest 2]: thing about high performance careers, right?
[Guest 2]: People who are astronauts, or for that
[Guest 2]: matter, mountaineers and cricketers
[Guest 2]: and stuff like that, that when you
[Guest 2]: unravel them,
[Guest 2]: the quality of the insight
[Guest 2]: is phenomenal.
[Guest 2]: It just opens your mind and says,
[Guest 2]: Oh, this can also happen. In normal
[Guest 2]: circumstances, how much do we visualize?
[Guest 2]: But when you hear a story of a
[Guest 2]: cricketer or a basketball player visualizing,
[Guest 2]: the impact
[Guest 2]: of that concept hits you harder.
[Guest 2]: So when you talk to maybe
[Guest 2]: an economist or for that matter, somebody who
[Guest 2]: has been a foreign secretary, you know
[Guest 2]: it's a high pressure zone that the person
[Guest 2]: has performed. And therefore, the
[Guest 2]: higher the pressure, the
[Guest 2]: more interesting the story gets.
[Guest 2]: This is what I have realized. And because
[Guest 2]: you love a particular sport
[Guest 2]: or for that matter, a particular
[Guest 2]: profession, when you start
[Guest 2]: entering their world
[Guest 2]: and what is our joy, right? And I think
[Guest 2]: we share this thing.
[Guest 2]: We like to go into other people's world.
[Guest 2]: And that's why you read so many books,
[Guest 2]: right? What is a book? A book
[Guest 2]: basically is transporting you to
[Guest 2]: a different profession, a different person,
[Guest 2]: a different thought process where you are
[Guest 2]: saying, Boss, if I read
[Guest 2]: a book by an economist, I became an economist.
[Guest 2]: If I read a book by a cricketer, I became a cricketer.
[Guest 2]: So somewhere it's a voyeuristic
[Guest 2]: way in which
[Guest 2]: you live other people. And that's why I like
[Guest 2]: autobiographies. And that's why when I went into
[Guest 2]: his world and I'm saying that, Boss, I'm
[Guest 2]: sitting with a guy
[Guest 2]: who's actually scored the 100 100s.
[Guest 2]: And now he
[Guest 2]: will tell me, Boss, what happened?
[Guest 2]: Now when he tells me what happened,
[Guest 2]: my dopamine
[Guest 2]: goes to the dope level.
[Unknown]: Because I'm thinking,
[Guest 2]: he told me that story.
[Guest 2]: It feels good to hear a story.
[Guest 2]: We are all in the story business.
[Guest 2]: So
[Guest 2]: that is why when What the Duck happened,
[Guest 2]: What the Duck moment for me
[Guest 2]: was like your scene and the unseen moment.
[Guest 2]: Where you're going and asking them questions
[Guest 2]: and they are putting down
[Guest 2]: their entire life story.
[Guest 2]: But I don't deep dive that much.
[Guest 2]: I had 45 minutes to an hour.
[Guest 2]: So my curation was way more
[Guest 2]: because they are people with limited
[Guest 2]: time and they would not like to share their life.
[Guest 2]: And they would not like
[Guest 2]: to share their life in public. They would share that
[Guest 2]: with me over a drink or whatever
[Guest 2]: and stuff like that. But when you
[Guest 2]: hear those insights, the joy you
[Guest 2]: get is what makes this
[Guest 2]: entire activity special.
[Guest 2]: You talk about work ethic. One of the biggest
[Guest 2]: events I have done from a
[Guest 2]: sheer happiness point of
[Guest 2]: view is a concert that
[Guest 2]: we did where
[Guest 1]: Sachin Tendulkar was in conversation with
[Guest 2]: Ustad Zakir Hussain.
[Guest 2]: Man, to me that three days
[Guest 2]: of sitting with Zakir Hussain and Sachin
[Guest 2]: Tendulkar curating this show
[Guest 2]: and what they will be speaking. It's a tough
[Guest 2]: one, right? One is a cricketer, one is a tabla
[Guest 2]: maestro. But I
[Guest 2]: want to get them to
[Guest 2]: common points where they talk about them
[Guest 2]: and then the final
[Guest 2]: output should be, oh my god.
[Guest 2]: So it was just amazing
[Guest 2]: because Zakir Hussain was saying things
[Guest 2]: about his life which were like
[Guest 2]: wow, what a story that he told.
[Guest 2]: Imagine, this is Sachin, this is Zakir
[Guest 2]: Hussain, this is me, this is Sunandan
[Guest 2]: and a conversation is happening
[Guest 2]: where Zakir Hussain is saying that
[Guest 2]: Sachin, first show me your hands.
[Guest 2]: And he showed his hands and
[Guest 2]: Zakir Hussain touched his hand
[Guest 2]: and said that just give me 30 seconds.
[Guest 2]: The hands
[Guest 2]: that made 100
[Guest 2]: let the power of those hands go into my hands.
[Guest 2]: By doing this, he held his
[Guest 2]: hand for 30 seconds. And Zakir is a
[Guest 2]: maestro, right? At all levels
[Guest 2]: he is a charming man.
[Guest 2]: And then he said that actually
[Guest 2]: these hands were also mine.
[Guest 2]: So I said, Zakir bhai, why are you saying this?
[Guest 2]: I was a wicket keeper in Shivaji Park.
[Guest 2]: And we used to live in Mahim.
[Guest 2]: I used to play regular cricket.
[Guest 2]: I was a good wicket keeper.
[Guest 2]: One day, while collecting the ball
[Guest 2]: on my left hand,
[Guest 2]: when I came home,
[Guest 2]: Baba said
[Guest 2]: that son, come here.
[Guest 2]: Your hands
[Guest 2]: are not made to collect the ball.
[Guest 2]: What you can see
[Guest 2]: your hands are made to
[Guest 2]: collect the ball.
[Guest 2]: And he said for me that was a day where I felt
[Guest 2]: really hurt because my cricket was being
[Guest 2]: taken away from me because I loved wicket keeping.
[Guest 2]: And then they had a conversation
[Guest 2]: about
[Guest 2]: the sound of the tabla.
[Guest 2]: And then Sachin said,
[Guest 2]: for both of us, sound is important.
[Guest 2]: Because there is
[Guest 2]: twice in the net when you get that.
[Guest 2]: And you know the sound
[Guest 2]: is where an indicator
[Guest 2]: of whether you are in form or not.
[Guest 2]: And he said exactly, when we come to the sum,
[Guest 2]: when we play the tabla
[Guest 2]: with that sound.
[Guest 2]: Amit, this went on and I am like
[Amit Varma]: wow, wow, wow, wow.
[Guest 2]: And you are also a tabla player and a batsman yourself.
[Guest 2]: Again, I am a failed tabla player
[Guest 2]: and a failed cricketer. So I appreciate this more.
[Guest 2]: And then Zakir Bhai said
[Guest 2]: something interesting. He said,
[Guest 2]: Sachin, do you remember you made 241
[Guest 2]: when you
[Guest 2]: hit the upper cut
[Guest 2]: of Brett Lee's short ball.
[Guest 2]: In our profession,
[Guest 2]: that is called coming to the sum.
[Guest 2]: When
[Guest 2]: that sound comes,
[Guest 2]: when it comes out of the tabla,
[Guest 2]: then you are in form.
[Unknown]: And then they went on.
[Guest 1]: And then Tendulkar played that instrument.
[Guest 2]: He played that instrument.
[Guest 2]: We curated that as well.
[Guest 2]: And then it went on
[Guest 2]: and then I, standard work
[Guest 2]: ethic question, so I asked
[Guest 2]: Zakir Bhai that
[Guest 2]: how many hours do you practice?
[Guest 2]: I was looking for 12 hours
[Guest 2]: and 14 hours. He looked
[Guest 2]: at me and said, sometimes
[Guest 2]: we stop.
[Guest 2]: Then I went
[Guest 2]: and said, what are you saying?
[Guest 2]: He said that a good artist
[Guest 2]: never stops practicing.
[Guest 2]: When you
[Guest 2]: sit on the tabla, it comes out.
[Guest 2]: But
[Guest 2]: when you practice so many ragas
[Guest 2]: in your mind, then
[Guest 2]: there is no time for you
[Guest 2]: to not be in it.
[Guest 2]: When you sit on a concert,
[Guest 2]: your image is already there
[Guest 2]: and you join it
[Guest 2]: and it comes out through the tabla.
[Guest 2]: So work ethic
[Guest 2]: is the same thing
[Guest 2]: in whose mind it goes on.
[Guest 2]: Imagine Sachin Tendulkar said, yeah, you are always
[Guest 2]: batting. And to me,
[Guest 2]: he
[Guest 2]: making one point, this guy
[Guest 2]: making and he said that, you know,
[Guest 2]: as a kid, I didn't know when I was stopping
[Guest 2]: batting because I was always playing
[Guest 2]: the ball in my head.
[Guest 2]: Even Kohli talks about it.
[Guest 2]: The fact that my success
[Guest 2]: he says is because of the fact that
[Guest 2]: I am constantly practicing.
[Guest 2]: Whether you are practicing actually or
[Guest 2]: practicing in your brain does not matter.
[Guest 2]: And that kind of
[Guest 2]: you know,
[Guest 2]: this entire journey of experiencing
[Guest 2]: both professions
[Guest 2]: but reaching to the common goal of
[Guest 2]: excellence. When you said work ethic
[Guest 2]: kind of these were memories that I could
[Guest 2]: not forget. And there was another one
[Guest 2]: very interesting memory. Martina Navratilova
[Guest 2]: I was interviewing in Thailand.
[Guest 2]: And so
[Guest 1]: this is again, you know.
[Guest 1]: While all the dealers are taking massages.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, and this is
[Guest 2]: the most important lesson I have
[Guest 2]: learned in life.
[Guest 2]: And which has come through sport
[Guest 2]: but in a sense it kind of is
[Guest 2]: the most important lesson everybody should
[Guest 2]: learn about and that is being in the moment.
[Guest 2]: Right?
[Guest 2]: So
[Guest 2]: I asked Martina that you know
[Guest 2]: when does a sports person
[Guest 2]: decide to call it a day?
[Guest 2]: She said it's a very
[Guest 2]: simple answer.
[Guest 2]: And it happened to me at Wimbledon.
[Guest 2]: I was about to serve
[Guest 2]: and I could hear the plane pass by.
[Guest 2]: I stopped, again I
[Guest 2]: tossed the ball and I could hear the plane
[Guest 2]: pass by again.
[Guest 2]: And that day she said I decided
[Amit Varma]: to retire. What an answer.
[Guest 2]: She said because in my life
[Guest 2]: when I was at play
[Guest 2]: I could not hear anything.
[Guest 2]: And the day I heard
[Guest 2]: the plane I knew it was time for me.
[Guest 2]: Ian Chappell said the same thing.
[Guest 2]: He said Chapelle when did you retire? He said
[Guest 2]: there was a match in Adelaide
[Guest 2]: when I was in second slip.
[Guest 2]: And at around 4.30
[Guest 2]: I looked at the watch.
[Guest 2]: And I looked at the watch again at 4.45.
[Guest 2]: 5.15 I had decided to retire.
[Guest 2]: Because Martina said
[Guest 2]: the human mind
[Guest 2]: has the ability to focus only on
[Guest 2]: one thing. It's the past, present
[Guest 2]: or the future. If something is
[Guest 2]: disturbing your current moment
[Guest 2]: it's an area of concern.
[Guest 2]: And you have to evaluate it and you know that
[Guest 2]: it's not the right day.
[Guest 2]: And that brings me to an amazing story
[Guest 2]: of Virendra Sehwag.
[Guest 2]: Everybody knows about
[Guest 2]: Veeru singing.
[Guest 2]: I had a chat with him one day and said
[Guest 2]: what's the theory of singing?
[Guest 2]: Before this I had read a very interesting book
[Guest 2]: by a guy called I think John Galway.
[Guest 2]: He talks about
[Guest 2]: the mental state in tennis.
[Guest 2]: So it's a very interesting thing.
[Guest 2]: He said when you are playing tennis
[Guest 2]: you will normally hear
[Guest 2]: players say what are you doing?
[Guest 2]: Hit the shot.
[Guest 2]: I also play tennis so I know that
[Guest 2]: what he is doing.
[Guest 2]: So he said there are two states of play
[Guest 2]: in a human body when you are playing sport.
[Guest 2]: One is that
[Guest 2]: self-one which is that guy
[Guest 2]: who is playing tennis who has honed his skill
[Guest 2]: over the years and he has allowed
[Guest 2]: the body to react.
[Guest 2]: So your ball is coming, you are reacting
[Guest 2]: because you have learnt it.
[Guest 2]: The whole system is geared to pick
[Guest 2]: the ball, length, drive, play the
[Guest 2]: drop shot or whatever.
[Guest 2]: Now this is what is
[Guest 2]: the machine.
[Guest 2]: Second is a guy called self-two
[Guest 2]: which is there in the body which is the mind.
[Guest 2]: This is the most dangerous guy
[Guest 2]: because this is the guy who is creating
[Guest 2]: self-doubt in self-one and disallowing
[Guest 2]: him to play.
[Guest 2]: So the whole journey of a sportsman
[Guest 2]: is to keep self-two away
[Guest 2]: from self-one.
[Guest 2]: And sledging, and my analysis
[Guest 2]: is sledging is exactly to
[Guest 2]: activate self-two. So the moment
[Guest 2]: a batsman comes into bat and a wicket keeper
[Guest 2]: says, hey mate, yesterday you couldn't take the
[Guest 2]: bouncer.
[Guest 2]: Will tell self-two.
[Guest 2]: And the moment self-two has said
[Guest 2]: boss you can't play the bouncer
[Guest 2]: the entire mind will shift to the fact
[Guest 2]: that you can't play the bouncer and you
[Guest 2]: will get out on a bouncer.
[Guest 2]: So how do you deactivate this
[Guest 2]: self-doubt fellow to allow your body
[Guest 2]: to be in the natural state so
[Guest 2]: that it reacts to the ball at play is
[Guest 2]: the entire journey of being in the moment.
[Guest 2]: And that is what a sports
[Guest 2]: person is trying. And now in
[Guest 2]: that context, I had read this and that's why if you
[Guest 2]: see what you have to do is once you play
[Guest 2]: a tennis shot, tennis players are told to
[Guest 2]: count the strings of the racket.
[Guest 2]: This allows you to
[Guest 2]: worry about the bad shot that you
[Guest 2]: played and you reduce the
[Guest 2]: anxiety of the next shot you are going to play.
[Guest 2]: So that's the logic of being in play.
[Guest 2]: So when I asked Sehwag
[Guest 2]: he said, Mr. Sathe, see what happens
[Guest 2]: your wicket goes between one ball
[Guest 2]: and the other ball.
[Guest 2]: I said, explain.
[Guest 2]: He said, what happens is
[Guest 2]: when I play the ball
[Guest 2]: suppose I hit it on the cover point
[Guest 2]: so I am thinking if the next ball comes like this
[Guest 2]: Gillespie did this, he did that
[Guest 2]: and I am seeing that as my
[Guest 2]: thought is swinging
[Guest 2]: I go
[Guest 2]: and the next ball comes like this.
[Guest 2]: So I asked Dravid
[Guest 2]: and he said that I do deep breathing
[Guest 2]: in the square leg position.
[Guest 2]: So I told Dravid that
[Guest 2]: I don't know how to do meditation
[Unknown]: but whenever I do it, I feel sleepy.
[Unknown]: So he said
[Guest 2]: I found out
[Guest 2]: that in one ball
[Guest 2]: and the other ball
[Guest 2]: I have to hit Kishore Kumar.
[Guest 2]: And he said the moment I played the ball
[Guest 2]: and I came this way
[Guest 2]: I kept on playing
[Guest 2]: till the bowler's mark
[Guest 2]: I would say and many times
[Guest 2]: I have told Ishaan Sharma
[Guest 2]: that I have forgotten the lyrics
[Guest 2]: of 12th man.
[Guest 2]: He said this is the work of 12th man
[Guest 2]: in Indian cricket.
[Guest 1]: And then he said
[Guest 1]: It's happened
[Guest 1]: in a match in South Africa
[Guest 2]: he said I forgot the lyrics
[Guest 2]: of this song
[Guest 2]: and Ishaan Sharma
[Guest 2]: brought it from this
[Guest 2]: and he went on to score some 100 runs
[Guest 2]: or something like that. So I thought
[Guest 2]: these were very deep philosophies
[Guest 2]: of being in the moment
[Guest 2]: and if you want
[Guest 2]: anybody to, like I told my nephew
[Guest 2]: the other day who has a little bit of attention issue
[Guest 2]: like me and said that now that you are
[Guest 2]: doing this, can you just for the next
[Guest 2]: 15 minutes do this without getting distracted.
[Guest 2]: And now in this mobile generation
[Guest 2]: it's getting tougher and tougher.
[Guest 2]: So many young players today
[Guest 2]: Rahul would probably spend more time
[Guest 2]: in telling them to be in the moment
[Guest 2]: because rest of the cricketing skills as Rawit says
[Guest 2]: these boys are far better than what we were
[Guest 2]: during the 80s and the 90s
[Guest 2]: because they have far more
[Guest 2]: strokes than I can ever imagine
[Guest 2]: in my life. So yeah, so
[Guest 2]: through cricket there were some great life
[Guest 2]: lessons that one got exposed to
[Guest 2]: basic things that everybody in life
[Guest 2]: should be doing and from
[Guest 2]: sheer, as I said
[Guest 2]: we all share this thing of
[Guest 1]: understanding people's lives and
[Guest 2]: No no really, I think
[Guest 2]: And pressure makes
[Guest 2]: others life more interesting.
[Guest 1]: You know so in fact
[Guest 1]: you know when I started
[Guest 1]: Commune and before that
[Guest 1]: every time, I mean before that I think most of my
[Guest 1]: things that I was doing
[Guest 1]: and when you started with this thing of saying that you know
[Guest 1]: this self-belief and wanting
[Guest 1]: to do everything for yourself
[Guest 1]: I initially was just
[Guest 1]: doing things because you know I had
[Guest 1]: these little caveats,
[Guest 1]: I have to earn this much money, I have to do this, I have to do that
[Guest 1]: whatever and then came that
[Guest 1]: little period of time when I was doing stuff
[Guest 1]: because it was all very safe. Similarly
[Guest 1]: before television shows they were all safe
[Guest 1]: I wasn't acting because that I was unsafe
[Guest 1]: then when I got into the film I said
[Guest 1]: yaar ab bas ban gaya and you know the problem was
[Guest 1]: and I mean Sartin was very close to me because he was with me
[Guest 1]: in that journey with a whole bunch of our friends
[Guest 1]: and at that point in time I started
[Guest 1]: imagining the outcome
[Guest 1]: more than concentrating
[Guest 1]: on what I was doing. Like I swear
[Guest 1]: I swear the stupidest thing was to think
[Guest 1]: ke main toh Indian Idol ka judge bhi ban jaoga
[Guest 1]: you know ke bhai itni badi film banane ke baad
[Guest 1]: Red Chillies ki
[Guest 1]: I'll be an Indian Idol judge
[Guest 1]: and you get seduced by all the stupid
[Guest 1]: things in the world you know
[Guest 1]: the role to hell is played with good
[Guest 1]: intention kind of stuff and
[Guest 1]: there is this classic problem
[Guest 1]: if you are a democratic decision
[Guest 1]: maker which I normally am, I like to take everyone's
[Guest 1]: opinion. On a film set and
[Guest 1]: Quentin Tarantino said this, he says you know
[Guest 1]: I am the Pope
[Guest 1]: at the altar that you worship
[Guest 1]: so in this moment
[Guest 1]: main hoon Bhagwan
[Guest 1]: main jo bol raha hoi hoga
[Guest 1]: chahe mujhe khud nahi pata. Imtiaz has told
[Guest 1]: me the same thing at times, saying that I am on the set
[Guest 1]: and suddenly somebody will ask me saying ki
[Guest 1]: sir my cinematography, I didn't know nothing about cinematography
[Guest 1]: so often I would have
[Guest 1]: a shot being done and in the middle of the shot
[Guest 1]: my cinematographer would come and say Imtiaz I am thinking of
[Guest 1]: doing a mid shot moving from here to here, what do you think?
[Guest 1]: So I used to listen to him
[Guest 1]: pause for a bit and turn and say ha sir
[Guest 1]: maybe you could start a little longer
[Guest 1]: because I didn't
[Guest 1]: know what to tell him. Toh main karte rehte
[Guest 1]: the but I couldn't show people that I don't know
[Guest 1]: I would very often naively
[Guest 1]: acknowledge the fact ki yaar achha tum kaise karoge
[Guest 1]: and I realized that on a film set
[Guest 1]: na everybody wants to make their own film
[Guest 1]: and they are dying to and they
[Guest 1]: will never get that opportunity
[Guest 1]: so you open up that opportunity once
[Guest 1]: and everyone from the
[Guest 1]: gaffer to the AD to the actor
[Guest 1]: to the makeup person will tell you his version
[Guest 1]: of your film and that is
[Guest 1]: so hyper confusing unless you are decisive
[Guest 1]: so you can hear and make your decision so now shut up
[Guest 1]: main kar raha hoon, yeh ek
[Guest 1]: problem type tha and
[Guest 1]: dhai saal, teen saal film pe
[Guest 1]: kaam karne ke baad na main nichud chuka
[Guest 1]: tha, mere andar se sab nikal gaya tha, koi kahani
[Guest 1]: nahi bachi thi, nothing was left
[Guest 1]: so when Commune started
[Guest 1]: and Sathe knows this, I said
[Guest 1]: every time a session happens
[Guest 1]: I am richer because main das
[Guest 1]: kahania sunta, main das
[Guest 1]: logon ki vision se sunta
[Guest 1]: and because I hear them
[Guest 1]: and I don't see them
[Guest 1]: I visualize them as a film
[Guest 1]: so every time I would say
[Guest 1]: yeh aisa hota toh, aisa ho jata hai
[Guest 1]: now this has been happening from 2015
[Guest 1]: onwards roughly, 17 actively
[Guest 1]: and I am now
[Guest 1]: absolutely, I am now set again
[Guest 1]: I have written a book which is going to be
[Guest 1]: a film, writing two OTT shows
[Guest 1]: but it's all because I have been
[Guest 1]: so enriched by these stories
[Guest 1]: that I have listened, so as you said
[Guest 1]: being a great listener
[Guest 1]: is a 101% something that
[Guest 1]: I have actually re-picked
[Guest 1]: but I feel I picked it till I was 23-24
[Guest 1]: then I implemented it for a good 15 years
[Guest 1]: sab nichlo gaya, ab phir bharna
[Guest 1]: shuru kara tha, did all that
[Guest 1]: this being present
[Guest 1]: is something that I, again recently
[Guest 1]: in the play I realized because
[Guest 1]: I was there, an MC
[Guest 1]: acting as an actor
[Guest 1]: play acting as an actor, till I
[Guest 1]: realized in the first 20 days ki mere charo
[Guest 1]: taraf sab actor thi, unka profession sirf
[Guest 1]: acting tha, there were one or two
[Guest 1]: of them who were, like Namit is a great
[Guest 1]: singer and an actor
[Guest 1]: and he used to have a band and everything else
[Guest 1]: but everybody else was just an actor
[Guest 1]: and so their craft was at another
[Guest 1]: level, so the first thing
[Guest 1]: was that on the 10th day or something
[Guest 1]: I actually went up to Sagar and I said Sagar
[Guest 1]: will you do my lines with me, and he was like
[Guest 1]: kya baat kar rahe hain aap, and I said nahi nahi bhai
[Guest 1]: yeh main aapko guru maan ke keh rahe hain
[Guest 1]: and he was like arre Roshan bhai aap aisa baat kar rahe hain
[Guest 1]: and I was like nahi, I am not joking
[Guest 1]: I am not trying to chadhao you, I am being
[Guest 1]: honest in telling you, this is your craft
[Guest 1]: I am a learner, teach me
[Guest 1]: and I said you do it, you do it, you do it and I would keep
[Guest 1]: observing him and seeing this
[Guest 1]: or like Sharwari was in every scene and I found her to be so
[Guest 1]: and I went to her and said to me how are you
[Guest 1]: so present, and then she
[Guest 1]: told me this thing about saying that you know how she
[Guest 1]: she uses breath
[Guest 1]: and said it's not just my breath, it's your breath
[Guest 1]: because we are in
[Guest 1]: the air, hum dono
[Guest 1]: ek hi set of
[Guest 1]: hum ek hi
[Guest 1]: envelope of air me se aap saas le raha hain
[Guest 1]: toh agar aap zyada lenge toh mai kam lungi
[Guest 1]: aur agar aap kam lenge toh, you know like it's this thing
[Guest 1]: and to think of something so
[Guest 1]: deeply, ek dikh khushi
[Guest 1]: hoti hai to know ke kisi nein
[Guest 1]: itna socha hai, phir aap usko implement
[Guest 1]: karte hain, you know, there is a scene
[Guest 1]: in which Lalit has just
[Guest 1]: realized that the house is crumbling and he's got to
[Guest 1]: make this big decision between
[Guest 1]: you know, can he banish the magic
[Guest 1]: child who is his cousin's
[Guest 1]: daughter or does he manage to banish the brother
[Guest 1]: what does he do and there was a
[Guest 1]: moment and Meera kept coming to me and
[Guest 1]: explaining because I was
[Guest 1]: so I would perform the thing perfectly and
[Guest 1]: then there was a point where I would suddenly have to say where's the
[Guest 1]: scene is over and it switches
[Guest 1]: the tone to where's the photographer
[Guest 1]: and I would say it and she would keep saying no
[Guest 1]: I'm like, I think
[Guest 1]: I'm doing a great job, the scene is
[Guest 1]: killer and she says see
[Guest 1]: if you were present
[Guest 1]: you cannot switch emotions so quickly
[Guest 1]: you've just banished a man
[Guest 1]: who meant everything in your life, in
[Guest 1]: 3 seconds if you're saying where's the photographer
[Guest 1]: you can't be all hunky dory
[Guest 1]: your emotional residue would still
[Guest 1]: be there and I couldn't feel it
[Guest 1]: couldn't feel it, couldn't feel it, kept asking
[Guest 1]: you know, I asked the other actor, asked the other actor
[Guest 1]: and everybody said, tum kaise karte hai, tum kaise karte hai
[Guest 1]: tum kaise karte hai, tum kaise karte hai
[Guest 1]: ultimately you know, so I had to develop
[Guest 1]: my own thing and I remembered this breath thing
[Guest 1]: so from the point of the
[Guest 1]: banishment which is about a minute and a half of a scene
[Guest 1]: I start holding my breath
[Guest 1]: you know, and
[Guest 1]: my voice gets more constricted
[Guest 1]: because saans kam hai, toh you know, wo barti jaari hai
[Guest 1]: whatever, at this point
[Guest 1]: I used to have to take such a deep
[Guest 1]: saans
[Guest 1]: that usse wo
[Guest 1]: emotional change automatically
[Guest 1]: aa jata tha and then
[Guest 1]: when I said, where's that photographer
[Guest 1]: you know, and I was still
[Guest 1]: and the day I did it, she said
[Guest 1]: yeah, you're there
[Guest 1]: wo understanding jo hoti hai na
[Guest 1]: by listening, by being present
[Guest 1]: by rehearsing that craft and I just
[Guest 1]: feel this, that you know, we're always
[Guest 1]: a work in beta
[Guest 1]: and
[Guest 1]: you must believe that, you know
[Guest 1]: your craft, you can only keep improving
[Guest 1]: the amount I picked up
[Guest 1]: you know, and I'm telling you, ever since I started
[Guest 1]: listening to the podcast, then the classes
[Guest 1]: then our conversations, and I'm a
[Guest 1]: I'm a sponge, main wo kheechta raunga
[Guest 1]: nichod uska kam nikalega, mujhe nahi pata hai
[Guest 2]: ya saathi ho, hum log ki jab aatey hoti hai, hum log
[Guest 2]: dus corporate me jaatey
[Guest 1]: aur usse do
[Unknown]: business bala ke, usko bhej dala
[Guest 1]: but that is where
[Guest 1]: you know, natural, ek commune me sab
[Guest 2]: storya jaane ho hai, nahi nahi bilkul
[Guest 1]: main aaj jo script likhna hu, isliye
[Guest 1]: hai because mujhe ab wo
[Guest 1]: mujhe wo grammar, wo text, wo canvas
[Guest 1]: wo sab phir se mil gaya hai, aur mera
[Guest 1]: confidence ab us level pe, teri maa ki yaar
[Guest 1]: ab dikha, ab wo dhar diwali matra
[Guest 1]: dhar aa gaya tha, Meera said
[Guest 1]: something, so what happened was, a week before the
[Guest 1]: play, suddenly we were given a message, which came saying
[Guest 1]: that tomorrow morning guys, we have a script
[Guest 1]: read, jo yaar har roh
[Guest 1]: script padne hain, new script read kya hai
[Guest 1]: so we were told that the culture ministry
[Guest 1]: in Doha, I mean there are some things and whatever
[Guest 1]: cultural sensitivities, we will have to address
[Guest 1]: and I am seeing this woman
[Guest 1]: you know, bloody
[Guest 1]: world renowned director, 65
[Guest 1]: year old, handling the world on one side
[Guest 1]: doing this play against all
[Guest 1]: odds, our equipment hadn't reached Amit
[Guest 1]: on time, we were delayed
[Unknown]: but she is coming every morning with
[Unknown]: this, good morning sunshines, how are you all
[Unknown]: doing, come here my loves, give me a hug
[Guest 1]: you know, and I would turn to her
[Guest 1]: and I remember that morning when she had to do
[Guest 1]: all of this, I turned to her and said, how are you doing
[Guest 1]: not good, but I better act with all of you
[Guest 1]: and she just told me in my ear
[Guest 1]: hai yaar dekho yeh kya hai, toh jab wo
[Guest 1]: show khatam wa, bahot acha show tha
[Guest 1]: and she was just absolutely delighted
[Guest 1]: and I went to her and she said, it's what I always say
[Guest 1]: it's what I always say, heart of a poet
[Guest 1]: skin of an elephant
[Guest 1]: you know, and that line
[Guest 1]: meri toh latest learning
[Guest 1]: of har jagah hai, usko apne diwaag pe chalata hu
[Guest 1]: main usme ek line add kar di hai, heart of a poet
[Guest 1]: hide of an elephant, brain of a business
[Unknown]: I think uska theek tha
[Guest 1]: aapne business kyu add kya, mujhe pata nahi
[Guest 1]: yeh dhan do
[Guest 1]: dhan do
[Guest 1]: but it was just that, I just felt that
[Guest 1]: it was such a great
[Guest 1]: thing to pick up and
[Guest 1]: you know, to just constantly keep
[Guest 1]: evolving along this line is the
[Guest 1]: biggest lesson that I can possibly
[Guest 1]: give to anyone
[Guest 1]: to the younger generation, there's one lesson that
[Guest 1]: I definitely want, and it's more of
[Guest 1]: less a lesson, more a request, it is
[Guest 1]: be gentle
[Guest 1]: be gentle with your elders because
[Guest 1]: they really are from a
[Guest 1]: different time, matlab wo sajh batara hu
[Guest 1]: jab main apne mamab ko handle karta hu kabhi kabar, there are some
[Guest 1]: things, aise hi baat ho rahi thi one day
[Guest 1]: and my mother, I could see that my mother was low about
[Guest 1]: something and I said, shall we go and
[Guest 1]: see a, and I couldn't even complete
[Guest 1]: pagal nahi ho, I said mom
[Guest 1]: I go and see a therapist
[Guest 1]: you know, Shaheen and I have gone
[Guest 1]: my children have gone when
[Guest 1]: they needed counselling, but for them
[Guest 1]: it means something else, unke ek stamp
[Guest 1]: laga hua hai, and
[Guest 1]: I'm like, I haven't been able to explain it to her
[Guest 1]: and I was very frustrated
[Guest 1]: very angry because I knew that if she did it
[Guest 1]: would make her such a difference, but she won't
[Guest 1]: because it's got this thing attached, and I just
[Guest 1]: have to be gentle and say
[Guest 1]: I can't change this, yeh main
[Guest 1]: nahi badal paunga, you know
[Guest 1]: toh theek hai, uske saath jeena seekhe
[Guest 1]: my father, you know
[Guest 1]: after he had his gallbladder thing
[Guest 1]: before, he said beta, iske baad
[Guest 1]: hospital kabhi nahi jaana, I'm like
[Guest 1]: God forbid na jaana padhe, dekhan agar
[Guest 1]: jaana padhega, toh main toh leke jaaunga
[Guest 1]: aap jo kar lijiye, he was like
[Guest 1]: no, you promise me that you will not do it, because I've done
[Guest 1]: my share, I'm very happy, I've got everything
[Guest 1]: again, you know like my mind is saying
[Guest 1]: what the hell, what are the resources, there's everything, medicine
[Guest 1]: blah blah blah, and sometimes
[Guest 1]: when I deal with my children now
[Guest 1]: I find it, I find that there
[Guest 1]: are moments of
[Guest 1]: deep resentment, there are moments of
[Guest 1]: grave misunderstanding
[Guest 1]: my daughter wrote a poem
[Guest 1]: and I got so impacted, because
[Guest 1]: you know, and I said, is this about us, and she
[Guest 1]: says, yeah, but it's poetry
[Guest 1]: and I'm exaggerating, and my
[Guest 1]: fear was, I hope she, what if she's not exaggerating
[Guest 1]: what if she really means every word of this
[Guest 1]: have we scarred her in this
[Guest 1]: manner, is it because of something she observed
[Guest 1]: but you know, it's just
[Guest 1]: that, and I just feel that people
[Guest 1]: need to be a little gentle
[Guest 1]: with each other, because
[Guest 1]: everyone has their own set of battles
[Guest 1]: everyone is coming from a different
[Guest 1]: set of beliefs
[Guest 1]: which have cast them a particular way
[Guest 1]: we try very hard to change, but
[Guest 1]: I think after a point
[Guest 1]: it doesn't happen, genuinely our
[Guest 1]: generation which looked both ways, once to
[Guest 1]: the computers and once to
[Guest 1]: the online, offline worlds, I believe
[Guest 1]: that we're a lot more resilient
[Guest 1]: personally, I'd like to believe that we're a lot more resilient
[Guest 1]: but you know, the other two
[Guest 1]: sides of the generation, they're very extreme
[Guest 1]: so in their interaction, there should be a lot of
[Guest 1]: gentleness, and
[Amit Varma]: our generation should also be a little gentle
[Amit Varma]: I think one person I'd like to bring up
[Amit Varma]: in this context is a guy called Phineas Gage
[Amit Varma]: have you heard of him? No, so Phineas
[Amit Varma]: Gage was a railroad
[Amit Varma]: worker in the 1840s
[Amit Varma]: or 1850s or whatever
[Amit Varma]: How would I know that?
[Amit Varma]: Because you are interested in neuroscience
[Unknown]: and this is a famous neuroscience case
[Unknown]: Oh, I know this story!
[Unknown]: So basically, he was a railroad
[Amit Varma]: worker, so he was working with some
[Amit Varma]: rods or whatever, so at one point
[Amit Varma]: he was distracted by something
[Amit Varma]: and there was a blast, and the rod went through his
[Amit Varma]: like, it came out from the
[Amit Varma]: head, it literally went through his brain
[Amit Varma]: right, so you'd imagine him to be
[Amit Varma]: dead on the spot, but he wasn't
[Amit Varma]: and people came, they managed to take
[Amit Varma]: the rod out, I think he was in the hospital for 2-3 weeks
[Amit Varma]: and then he was released
[Amit Varma]: now physically he got back to normal
[Amit Varma]: but he lost a part of his frontal
[Amit Varma]: cortex, now what happened
[Amit Varma]: was that physically
[Amit Varma]: he got back to normal, his memories
[Amit Varma]: were identical, his intelligence was the
[Amit Varma]: same, but his personality changed
[Amit Varma]: from being a gentle
[Amit Varma]: quiet person
[Unknown]: like Roshan, he became
[Amit Varma]: he became, and I can't
[Amit Varma]: even think of a comparison in this
[Amit Varma]: but he became a very violent, abusive
[Amit Varma]: ugly person, where he would shout
[Amit Varma]: at people and all of that, and lose his temper
[Amit Varma]: all the time, he became a completely different person
[Amit Varma]: one of his friends described him as
[Amit Varma]: Nod Gage, you know, from Phineas Gage
[Amit Varma]: to Nod Gage, and
[Amit Varma]: that was, a neuroscientist
[Amit Varma]: studied him, and you know, there are photographs
[Amit Varma]: of his skull with the rod go through it
[Amit Varma]: or maybe it's an image, whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: the conclusion there was
[Amit Varma]: that, and this is I think a profound truth
[Amit Varma]: for all of us, that character is
[Amit Varma]: more contingent than we think
[Amit Varma]: right, that we think
[Amit Varma]: I am who I am, you know, Roshan
[Amit Varma]: is a very gentle person, a good man
[Unknown]: put a rod through his head, then see what happens
[Amit Varma]: right, so the point is
[Amit Varma]: knowing him, he'll put a rod through his head
[Amit Varma]: yeah, no, after we put a rod
[Unknown]: through his head, he'll change and he'll put a rod through
[Amit Varma]: our heads, no, but the point being
[Amit Varma]: the point being, that
[Amit Varma]: everything that we are
[Amit Varma]: is so contingent, like I think back on one of my
[Amit Varma]: favorite musicians, Chris Cornell
[Amit Varma]: he took medication for something
[Amit Varma]: and that medication, it was later found out
[Unknown]: makes people suicidal, and he killed
[Amit Varma]: himself, right, so otherwise
[Amit Varma]: a person who is living life to the full
[Amit Varma]: always in the moment, actually changing
[Amit Varma]: completely, so, so much of what
[Amit Varma]: we are is dependent on things
[Amit Varma]: like the structure of the brain or the chemical
[Amit Varma]: balance of that day, you know
[Amit Varma]: if I miss my breakfast on a particular day
[Amit Varma]: I might be a different person in the afternoon
[Amit Varma]: just for a short span of time, you're reading
[Amit Varma]: Behave by Robert Sapolsky, so that is so much
[Amit Varma]: about how contingent all of this is
[Amit Varma]: and I want to double down on the advice you gave
[Amit Varma]: Roshan, for young people and for people everywhere
[Amit Varma]: in general, and say that
[Amit Varma]: please don't be judgmental of other
[Amit Varma]: people, number one reason might be
[Amit Varma]: that you are wrong, young people are often
[Amit Varma]: wrong, later you change your mind, you understand
[Amit Varma]: nuance, you understand the world differently
[Amit Varma]: so you might be wrong, but even if you're right
[Amit Varma]: even if you're convinced that you are right and somebody
[Amit Varma]: else is wrong in their doings, do not
[Amit Varma]: be judgmental because everything
[Amit Varma]: that we are is contingent, we are all
[Amit Varma]: going to die anyway, so be gentle
[Amit Varma]: be compassionate, always be good
[Amit Varma]: to everyone, and why am I sounding
[Amit Varma]: more and more like a self-help guru
[Amit Varma]: so let me come to another question with
[Amit Varma]: this, which is that you know what you were
[Amit Varma]: mentioning was very fascinating about
[Unknown]: you know Martin and Evrotilova hearing the
[Unknown]: plane, that's just such a mind
[Amit Varma]: such a beautiful mind blowing story and I'm
[Amit Varma]: reminded of, I wrote a
[Amit Varma]: post 18 years ago, I think 2004
[Amit Varma]: about why
[Amit Varma]: athletes choke, I think I was basing
[Amit Varma]: it on something Gladwell wrote
[Amit Varma]: and it's exactly the same thing, that there is one
[Amit Varma]: part of your decision making brain which is
[Amit Varma]: just automating everything, so if I'm
[Amit Varma]: driving on the street, where to turn
[Amit Varma]: I'm not even thinking, actually it's really
[Amit Varma]: complicated driving you know, there are the laws of
[Amit Varma]: physics, different objects of different
[Amit Varma]: masses moving from different angles at
[Amit Varma]: different velocities, it's incredibly
[Amit Varma]: complicated but the part of our brain
[Amit Varma]: handles it, but the moment the other part of the
[Amit Varma]: brain comes in where you begin to overthink it
[Amit Varma]: you are screwed, like I
[Amit Varma]: can type anything I want but if you ask me
[Amit Varma]: where is Y on the keyboard, you know
[Amit Varma]: without looking down, I can't tell you
[Amit Varma]: even though I obviously know because I'm always
[Amit Varma]: typing without looking at the keyboard or
[Amit Varma]: if I say, how do you sign, show me
[Amit Varma]: you know and you'll suddenly find
[Amit Varma]: the other part of your brain has come in and you're having
[Amit Varma]: trouble signing and you know
[Amit Varma]: you no longer control your bank
[Amit Varma]: account and everything's gone to hell
[Amit Varma]: but you know, leaving that
[Amit Varma]: aside, that
[Amit Varma]: aspect of being in the moment, right
[Amit Varma]: is super important
[Amit Varma]: not just for a Martin and Avratilova
[Amit Varma]: or for a Virender Sehwag
[Amit Varma]: but it's important
[Amit Varma]: for all of us and it's something that
[Amit Varma]: I try to do but it's incredibly
[Amit Varma]: hard because most of the time
[Amit Varma]: you're just a little bit in the past or a little bit
[Amit Varma]: in the future and earlier
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about Roshan routinizing
[Amit Varma]: everything and this is something I also
[Amit Varma]: want to ask about, that boss
[Amit Varma]: if I hadn't met you, I wouldn't have believed you're one person
[Amit Varma]: I would have thought it's a collective of people
[Amit Varma]: who call themselves Roshan Abbas and do all this
[Amit Varma]: He's a pent-a-polar man
[Amit Varma]: In fact, after this recording, I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: check if during this recording he's posted something
[Unknown]: on Twitter because then I will
[Unknown]: know that there's someone else
[Amit Varma]: It's a team of people who call themselves Roshan Abbas
[Amit Varma]: This guy is a front
[Amit Varma]: So I want to understand
[Amit Varma]: a little bit from both of you
[Amit Varma]: In your case, it's your mastery of work
[Amit Varma]: ethic and discipline and
[Amit Varma]: staying in the moment, each of the times you do
[Amit Varma]: this and in your case, it would be like
[Amit Varma]: in my case, an attempt
[Amit Varma]: to be sort of like that
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to hear of both your
[Amit Varma]: sort of experiences with this aspect
[Amit Varma]: and then we'll get back to the cricket and to Meera Nairji
[Guest 1]: And we've forgotten the singing
[Amit Varma]: That will come in the end
[Guest 2]: Right now, it's night time
[Guest 2]: Being in the moment, I've spoken about this
[Guest 2]: so I'll sum it up my way
[Guest 2]: and then you can take on because you're actually
[Amit Varma]: practicing it. But I'm actually asking about you
[Amit Varma]: like what have been your experiences
[Amit Varma]: How do you find a work ethic
[Amit Varma]: for yourself? Because I have the same problem
[Amit Varma]: as you in terms of attention span
[Amit Varma]: and mind always wandering and seeking
[Guest 2]: dopamine through various
[Guest 2]: Amit, you are at least
[Guest 2]: a thousand times better than me. I have
[Guest 2]: had this problem since I was a child
[Guest 2]: where my ability to
[Guest 2]: read more than 10 minutes is
[Guest 2]: not there. And I've struggled
[Guest 2]: but because I've been a lazy person, this I could
[Guest 2]: have won over only by
[Guest 2]: discipline and routinizing, which Roshan now
[Guest 2]: it comes naturally to him. So
[Guest 2]: if I would have practiced, maybe today
[Guest 2]: I decide to go home and I do
[Guest 2]: the routine like, you know, you look
[Guest 2]: at any cricketers post-match
[Guest 2]: interview, it's the two words routine
[Guest 2]: and process because that's the only
[Guest 2]: way to come to the moment. There is no other
[Guest 2]: way, right? So if we
[Guest 2]: for example, you and me have to come
[Guest 2]: to a point, we will have to
[Guest 2]: design our life from 6 am
[Guest 2]: in the morning, do that for 100
[Guest 2]: days to get that behavioral delta
[Guest 2]: going and only then we will be able
[Guest 2]: to get that, you know, as Gulzar
[Guest 2]: says to one of my friends
[Guest 2]: that irrespective of
[Guest 2]: what I do in my life
[Guest 2]: 8 to
[Guest 2]: 12 I write.
[Guest 2]: That's routine. So
[Guest 2]: once you write for 4 hours every
[Guest 2]: day, you might write the worst
[Guest 2]: thing in the world, but on your 100th
[Guest 2]: day, you'll realize that the quality
[Guest 2]: is improving. But I don't reach that process.
[Guest 2]: I don't do it for a day
[Guest 2]: and then I don't do it again.
[Guest 2]: That is purely work ethic
[Guest 2]: and discipline. And the moment you do it,
[Guest 2]: I have been told by people who are
[Guest 2]: performing at the highest level that you
[Guest 2]: will be surprised with the power of routine.
[Guest 2]: And that's what Atomic Habits also
[Guest 2]: talks about, right? It is just about
[Guest 2]: doing that drill again and again, playing
[Guest 2]: those 200 balls on a daily basis
[Guest 2]: and then you are also surprised
[Guest 2]: how you hit that. That's why if you see Virat
[Guest 2]: Kohli after that Haris
[Guest 2]: Rao shot, you see
[Guest 2]: him react in that post-match interview
[Guest 2]: and I do post-match, I listen to post-match
[Guest 2]: interviews very clearly because it's a
[Guest 2]: good representation of the state of mind
[Guest 2]: of the player at that point of time.
[Guest 2]: He says, I don't know how it happened,
[Guest 2]: which means he's in the moment.
[Guest 2]: The moment you are in the moment,
[Guest 2]: that's what in sporting parlance
[Guest 2]: is called a zone, where you actually
[Guest 2]: are not able to think of anything
[Guest 2]: and that is where your anxiety is the least.
[Guest 2]: Why do people say that,
[Guest 2]: boss, in the moment when you are there, then
[Guest 2]: there is no anxiety and stress in your life
[Guest 2]: because the past and present have been eliminated.
[Guest 2]: So philosophically also,
[Guest 2]: Patanjali 4000 years was trying to tell you
[Guest 2]: the same thing, that if you
[Guest 2]: stay on your breath, then you can't stay anywhere else.
[Guest 2]: Humanly it's not possible
[Guest 2]: that when I'm talking to you, I'm
[Guest 2]: on Twitter. Roshan is different.
[Guest 2]: But I'm saying generally for a person,
[Guest 2]: one thing at a time,
[Guest 2]: but you have to come to that work
[Guest 2]: and look at that ball.
[Guest 2]: Once Tendulkar told me that at
[Guest 2]: 30th over, by the
[Guest 2]: color of the ball, I could
[Guest 2]: pick at what point Magra would reverse swing.
[Guest 2]: And that I had done
[Guest 2]: by observing how color of the ball changes.
[Guest 2]: This is genius, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, how can you figure
[Guest 2]: out color of the ball and the nature of the reverse swing?
[Guest 2]: That comes because the guys see
[Guest 2]: and there is a huge significance
[Guest 2]: when the commentator says that he is seeing the ball
[Guest 2]: like a football. We think that
[Guest 2]: this is it. That big look
[Guest 2]: means that he is in such a
[Guest 2]: zone that his pupils are also dilating.
[Guest 2]: And as they say
[Guest 2]: when your adrenaline is high,
[Guest 2]: when you come in a fighter flight,
[Guest 2]: then your blood pressure
[Guest 2]: improves and that's when your body
[Guest 2]: is the best to react.
[Guest 2]: That's why you are in that state of
[Guest 2]: and I'll come to that last point of pressure, right?
[Guest 2]: That the pressure
[Guest 2]: handling is when the adrenaline
[Guest 2]: output is the most optimum.
[Guest 2]: When it is more,
[Guest 2]: it means you are in over analysis.
[Guest 2]: When it is less, it means you are not nervous.
[Guest 2]: So at a stand-up comedian level,
[Guest 2]: when I am a little nervous, that's when
[Guest 2]: my best one-liners come.
[Guest 2]: When I am complacent, my adrenaline is not there
[Guest 2]: so I have just done this thing.
[Guest 2]: When I am super nervous and I
[Guest 2]: prepared so heavily, so the amount
[Guest 2]: of preparation, which is process and
[Guest 2]: routine also, it has to be calibrated.
[Guest 2]: And that is why most sportsmen
[Guest 2]: say that the best time I have performed
[Guest 2]: is when I have rested well.
[Guest 2]: So that combination of how
[Guest 2]: much output to rest
[Guest 2]: defines a good sportsperson.
[Guest 2]: And my last point before the great
[Guest 2]: Roshan Abbas tells his routine
[Guest 2]: is the pressure point, right?
[Guest 2]: That there are two perspectives
[Guest 2]: of high-performance athletes to pressure.
[Guest 2]: One is
[Guest 2]: where they say, shit, tomorrow India-Pakistan
[Guest 2]: is the game, boss.
[Guest 2]: And that's nothing to do with your
[Guest 2]: prowess. Whereas the
[Guest 2]: other thing which you'll see Virat Kohli
[Guest 2]: mentioning that I am waiting for an
[Guest 2]: India-Pakistan game.
[Guest 2]: Rahul Dravid would say in India
[Guest 2]: when you met him after a test match,
[Guest 2]: I am waiting for England to begin.
[Guest 2]: Now these two perspectives
[Guest 2]: define a champion.
[Guest 2]: Because the moment you say
[Guest 2]: I am looking for pressure,
[Guest 2]: pressure does not affect you. The moment you
[Guest 2]: want to run away from pressure is when
[Guest 2]: you give a catch in the second, slip in the second
[Guest 2]: over, knowing that this batsman could
[Guest 2]: be actually better than this batsman.
[Guest 2]: And that is why the greatest
[Guest 2]: philosophy I have heard on pressure is
[Guest 2]: Jimmy Connor's statement when he was
[Guest 2]: asked, how do you deal with pressure?
[Guest 2]: He said, I
[Guest 2]: used to crumble under pressure.
[Guest 2]: Then I made a perspective for myself
[Guest 2]: and I said, when is the
[Guest 2]: time when I became
[Guest 2]: the richest? When is the time
[Guest 2]: when I was the happiest ever?
[Guest 2]: When is the time when I got the most attention?
[Guest 2]: It was when I performed
[Guest 2]: after a high-pressure game.
[Guest 2]: Which means if I have to get rich,
[Guest 2]: it means I have to be under pressure.
[Guest 2]: So if there is no pressure, what a boring thing to play.
[Guest 2]: So he calibrated
[Guest 2]: his mind in such a way that pressure is
[Guest 2]: where my incentive will be the highest.
[Guest 2]: And I'll get the most return
[Guest 2]: out of my profession. And he said
[Guest 2]: that the only quest now was, after
[Guest 2]: I had that perspective, was
[Guest 2]: wait for a high-pressure game. And that
[Guest 2]: is why my last submission
[Guest 2]: is that you see the greatest
[Guest 2]: players in the world, they don't
[Guest 2]: perform in Ranji Trophy games.
[Amit Varma]: There's a great quote by
[Amit Varma]: Keith Miller, an Australian all-rounder.
[Amit Varma]: He was in World War II.
[Amit Varma]: He was a pilot in World War II
[Amit Varma]: and there's a particular kind of German plane
[Amit Varma]: called the Messerschmitt. So Michael
[Amit Varma]: Parkinson once asked Keith Miller about pressure.
[Amit Varma]: And Keith Miller said, you know what pressure is?
[Amit Varma]: Pressure is a Messerschmitt up your arse.
[Amit Varma]: And when he was asked about captaincy pressure,
[Amit Varma]: he said, that's not all pressure.
[Amit Varma]: And that puts the whole thing
[Amit Varma]: into perspective, compared to that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, sort of
[Amit Varma]: what is pressure? And I came across this very interesting
[Amit Varma]: distinction between
[Amit Varma]: panic and choke, recently.
[Amit Varma]: Where the distinction is that
[Amit Varma]: choking is when you're overthinking it.
[Amit Varma]: Right? And panic is when you're not
[Amit Varma]: thinking enough.
[Guest 2]: Which I found really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So the answer is somewhere in between.
[Amit Varma]: The answer is, like you said, that specific
[Amit Varma]: point where everything is just
[Amit Varma]: kind of in place and you probably only
[Amit Varma]: get there if, like you said, if you're well rested,
[Amit Varma]: you're fresh and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you just kind of do your Kishore Kumar
[Amit Varma]: before the ball.
[Guest 1]: No, I think,
[Guest 1]: you know,
[Guest 1]: I've actually currently been
[Guest 1]: thinking a little deeply about
[Guest 1]: one or two areas, which
[Guest 1]: I actually wanted to ask and
[Guest 2]: even... Did you forget your question?
[Guest 1]: What? No, no, no.
[Unknown]: Yes, yes, yes.
[Unknown]: I'm saying that I'm sometimes
[Unknown]: told... After routine
[Guest 1]: that I'm so
[Guest 1]: work oriented,
[Guest 1]: I've made my life so much about
[Guest 1]: karma that
[Guest 1]: have I somewhere started
[Guest 1]: losing out
[Guest 1]: on the emotional
[Guest 1]: aspect of life?
[Guest 1]: I'm so work fulfilled that
[Guest 1]: am I fulfilled by the relationships
[Guest 1]: around me?
[Guest 1]: Because my work relationships, my friends
[Guest 1]: extend from my work relationships only.
[Guest 1]: Frankly, all the work
[Guest 1]: that I do is work that I enjoy. So I don't think it is
[Guest 1]: work. It is really a great environment to
[Guest 1]: be in. And so maybe
[Guest 1]: the other
[Guest 1]: thing that happens
[Guest 1]: is that
[Guest 1]: in that other quotient, am I
[Guest 1]: either incapable
[Guest 1]: or inadequate?
[Guest 1]: And this is...
[Guest 1]: So after Nikhil's episode, I actually called him and said,
[Guest 1]: Nikhil, give me your therapist's number. So I said,
[Guest 1]: I just want to discuss this because
[Guest 1]: with no therapist have I ever been able to discuss
[Guest 1]: this aspect that do some of us
[Guest 1]: become so well adapted
[Guest 1]: in that space that
[Guest 1]: we are maladjusted elsewhere.
[Guest 1]: And Satya has known me so long and he knows that
[Guest 1]: I genuinely try my
[Guest 1]: best to give time to family
[Guest 1]: and friends and you know
[Guest 1]: whatever. And I really do it.
[Guest 1]: There was an app I found some last year
[Guest 1]: called Garden. And Garden
[Guest 1]: is an app actually which says almost how to nurture
[Guest 1]: your relationship. So it says it allows you to divide
[Guest 1]: people into
[Guest 1]: family, friends and business.
[Guest 1]: And then accordingly
[Guest 1]: it allows you to set reminders when to
[Guest 1]: connect with them. So automatically it will do
[Guest 1]: family once a week, friends
[Guest 1]: say you know once a fortnight,
[Guest 1]: business maybe once a month and you can keep
[Guest 1]: varying that. And I used it for
[Guest 1]: 2-3 months and I realized that I do it automatically.
[Guest 1]: I stay in touch with
[Guest 1]: these three networks.
[Guest 1]: I call my parents every morning.
[Guest 1]: My son is in America. I normally
[Guest 1]: wait for him to get in touch with me or whatever
[Guest 1]: because I know he is in that phase where I was
[Guest 1]: in college that I didn't want to be in touch with anyone.
[Guest 1]: And I am okay with it. Shaheen
[Guest 1]: is not. Aayital
[Guest 1]: you know is 15.
[Guest 1]: Whenever, whatever I
[Guest 1]: can do, I do or whatever as I said
[Guest 1]: there are lots of topics that I might end up discussing with her
[Guest 1]: because we are trying to lead this two
[Guest 1]: country life at the moment and I have just been
[Guest 1]: taught this new thing about a three flag life
[Guest 1]: which is can you chase the
[Guest 1]: season of your choice across three countries
[Guest 1]: which is the best life
[Guest 1]: to lead. But then it is a nomadic
[Guest 1]: life and I am okay with a nomadic
[Guest 1]: life. I think somewhere we are still
[Guest 1]: struggling with the fact that we are in two countries
[Guest 1]: nowadays we are spending a lot
[Guest 1]: of time where Shaheen is running her business there, I am here
[Guest 1]: or whatever. And we have been
[Guest 1]: a very very close family
[Guest 1]: overall even otherwise.
[Guest 1]: Now with age you are realizing
[Guest 1]: that there is all of these aspects and sometimes
[Guest 1]: I have been just trying to understand that is it
[Guest 1]: a man thing?
[Guest 1]: That we are more work
[Guest 1]: oriented and are we emotionally
[Guest 1]: a little dissonant? Are we always brought up
[Guest 1]: not to show our emotions so
[Guest 1]: often? For example I cry
[Guest 1]: at a patriotic film but normally most other things
[Guest 1]: do not make me cry at all.
[Guest 1]: And again I am saying all this because
[Guest 1]: otherwise my work routine
[Guest 1]: and ethic is very clear.
[Guest 1]: I wake up really early, I normally get up
[Guest 1]: with my daughter in the morning so that I can see
[Guest 1]: her for that one hour before she goes to school.
[Guest 1]: She is very grumpy on certain
[Guest 1]: days and I tell her listen I am waking up an hour
[Guest 1]: before just to be with you.
[Guest 1]: Please at least try to be happy. And then
[Guest 1]: she says it's not you, it's me.
[Guest 1]: And I was like I understand
[Guest 1]: and she has found it. So there are days
[Guest 1]: when she will give me that happy radiant smile and hug me
[Guest 1]: and whatever. And there are days when she will sort of just
[Guest 1]: slink out of the door as if somebody was
[Guest 1]: the cat is dragging out. But it's
[Guest 1]: that or whatever. I then
[Guest 1]: because nobody else wakes up really early I get those
[Guest 1]: two hours with myself. Which is
[Guest 1]: when I am doing all my
[Guest 1]: browsing, gallivanting,
[Guest 1]: portals, going into trap doors,
[Guest 1]: new worlds and I just do
[Guest 1]: that. I don't
[Guest 1]: note all
[Guest 1]: of it down or whatever as it were.
[Guest 1]: Right after that in the morning
[Guest 1]: with breakfast and if I can I try to
[Guest 1]: work out three times a week. Sometimes I will do five
[Guest 1]: days. If I am in Dubai I will just go and cycle for 15
[Guest 1]: kilometers while listening to you half
[Guest 1]: the time at 1.5x
[Guest 1]: which now I have managed to get to 1.5.
[Guest 1]: And I know that my 15
[Guest 1]: kilometers in mean that it will take me
[Guest 1]: 45 minutes. And in those 45 minutes
[Guest 1]: I have almost covered two hours
[Guest 1]: of the podcast. So I have done half. Then I
[Guest 1]: try and do it the next day and that's one routine
[Guest 1]: that I follow. After that I have got these
[Guest 1]: two calls that are normally scheduled. One with my
[Guest 1]: internal team. So which is my left brain, right brain
[Guest 1]: and I say I have to do this today. Very often
[Guest 1]: I don't need to do that call because they now know it
[Guest 1]: so well that they know and they will just tell me what to do.
[Guest 1]: Then the rest of the
[Guest 1]: day normally will end up being
[Guest 1]: things that I have to engage with.
[Guest 1]: So for three months when I was doing the play I had
[Guest 1]: just changed that entire day. But I
[Guest 1]: informed everybody saying guys I will be
[Guest 1]: sporadically available in this time.
[Guest 1]: And because the biggest commitment at that time was spoken
[Guest 1]: I had also just given
[Guest 1]: up on Encompass which was my event company and I
[Guest 1]: exited it 100%. People were like oh my god
[Guest 1]: but that was you and the umbilical cord
[Guest 1]: and I said no. I had sold the
[Guest 1]: company in 2008.
[Guest 1]: You know
[Guest 1]: I was
[Guest 1]: taking care of it externally.
[Guest 1]: I don't need to anymore. At some
[Guest 1]: point we need to cut this umbilical cord
[Guest 1]: and I did it and whatever
[Guest 1]: and now the decision is WPPs are they
[Guest 1]: continuing or not continuing their life or whatever.
[Guest 1]: There's a bunch of people I
[Guest 1]: mentor and I don't think
[Guest 1]: I'm only mentoring them. There's a lot of times that I'm just
[Guest 1]: listening to them and getting. So whether it's a Pooja
[Guest 1]: who's a very dear friend
[Guest 1]: and who was running Glitch or whatever
[Guest 1]: Varun is there
[Guest 1]: Nikhil I consider more. And
[Guest 1]: again I will not say these are all mentees. These are all people
[Guest 1]: I love to interact with because
[Guest 1]: our work intersects and stuff
[Guest 1]: and there's a host of these people
[Guest 1]: you know. I spend time with
[Guest 1]: all of them. Occasionally
[Guest 1]: then I
[Guest 1]: like to take a little snooze if I can in the afternoon
[Guest 1]: doesn't happen more often than not but if I can
[Guest 1]: take that half an hour siesta I think that thing
[Guest 1]: beats it. I'm a tea addict.
[Guest 1]: I have 4-5 cups of tea.
[Guest 1]: I've had 4 with you.
[Guest 1]: And
[Guest 1]: that's how it continues and then
[Guest 1]: I like to engage with a certain amount
[Guest 1]: of you know that
[Guest 1]: famous book The Artist's Way
[Guest 1]: had two things. One which Sathe
[Guest 1]: in fact said that do something and do it continuously
[Guest 1]: so with her it was morning pages.
[Guest 1]: I did morning pages after the
[Guest 1]: film just to break that block and it did
[Guest 1]: help me. I did morning pages after
[Guest 1]: clear writing as well. And again that really
[Guest 1]: helped me because that's how I got a lot of work done
[Guest 1]: I think. But there's a beautiful thing in that which says
[Guest 1]: you know date an art form
[Guest 1]: and I try to do that. Like yesterday
[Guest 1]: I really wanted to go to the Thespo festival
[Guest 1]: that's happening at
[Guest 1]: Prithvi because I wanted to see
[Guest 1]: Sun Behen because it's a very good play.
[Guest 1]: I couldn't see it but I will
[Guest 1]: do something or whatever.
[Guest 1]: So I think this is how I try
[Guest 1]: and break up my
[Guest 1]: normal routine is this.
[Guest 1]: Earlier I would say yes
[Guest 1]: to a lot of just random
[Guest 1]: meetings. I have
[Guest 1]: filtered that down so people
[Guest 1]: I was so and I'm normally very very polite
[Guest 1]: so I don't normally tell people say
[Guest 1]: fuzz off. There's a
[Guest 1]: simple way of knowing if I'm interested or not
[Guest 1]: now which is that if I give you a reply which
[Guest 1]: is a
[Guest 1]: that means
[Guest 1]: if I give you a reply I'll say
[Guest 1]: which means
[Guest 1]: if I give you a definite yes or no then I'm into it.
[Guest 1]: My
[Guest 1]: spheres of work and again
[Guest 1]: I don't call it work because
[Guest 1]: I want to make a film, I want to write a book,
[Guest 1]: I want to grow the commune,
[Guest 1]: I have started experiences in Dubai
[Guest 1]: I have started a company, I will extend it to India
[Guest 1]: because again I feel that there are really no
[Guest 1]: quality experiences and the more I see them
[Guest 1]: the more I realize the gap and I want to
[Guest 1]: fill all of that and I think
[Guest 1]: this is pretty much what we do.
[Guest 1]: Shaheen makes sure that in the year
[Guest 1]: we get enough breaks, we have enough time
[Guest 1]: to connect with family and stuff and whatever.
[Guest 1]: She is the love laughter
[Guest 1]: fun department in many of
[Guest 1]: these things and honestly I think she is a lot more
[Guest 1]: emotionally grounded but
[Guest 1]: this is an area which currently
[Guest 1]: I'm trying to explore because I find this to be
[Guest 1]: somewhere an area
[Guest 1]: which either I'm under servicing or
[Guest 1]: is it truly under serviced in people like
[Guest 1]: yours is the
[Guest 1]: thing that I don't have an answer for
[Guest 1]: but otherwise
[Guest 1]: this is the way I sort of exist
[Guest 1]: I have a few
[Guest 1]: goals
[Guest 1]: that as I told you that when I discover
[Guest 1]: like I mean see for example this whole
[Guest 1]: a few money goal was a
[Guest 1]: very clear 10 million dollars, I mean I was very
[Guest 1]: clearly told it's a 10 million dollar goal or whatever
[Guest 1]: etc. I think I achieved it.
[Guest 1]: Yeah and it's fine
[Guest 1]: it's not liquid.
[Guest 1]: In an ideal FU
[Guest 1]: you know money
[Guest 1]: thing, it should be liquid.
[Guest 1]: It's not that, I didn't make that much liquidity
[Guest 1]: but I have made properties, houses
[Guest 1]: nobody is you know
[Guest 1]: there's no hand to mouth, you can make your
[Guest 1]: choices or whatever you want to do.
[Guest 1]: The F off which I recently
[Guest 1]: discovered in Dubai because Dubai is now
[Guest 1]: filled with billionaires
[Guest 1]: and billionaires and whatever.
[Guest 1]: I try to avoid one or two of those circles
[Guest 1]: because it unnecessarily creates
[Guest 1]: it exists as Sathe said
[Guest 1]: some of these networks exist on a
[Guest 1]: mere paas yeh hai, tumhare paas
[Guest 1]: kya hai kind, which I hate as a conversation
[Guest 1]: I don't understand anything.
[Guest 1]: If you want to share then it's a very good thing
[Guest 1]: let's do this together, I have such friends
[Guest 1]: they are billionaires but they are like let's do this together
[Guest 1]: which is great, it doesn't come from
[Guest 1]: a place of privilege, it comes from a place
[Guest 1]: of let's do this together and that could be
[Guest 1]: sitting together on a ukulele and singing
[Guest 1]: stupid songs while having wine and it could also
[Guest 1]: be going and seeing a play together or doing something
[Guest 1]: you know to a
[Guest 1]: certain degree but I just find
[Guest 1]: that this three flag life concept is something
[Guest 1]: I currently find very intriguing
[Guest 1]: right, when somebody said that
[Guest 1]: if winter is your favorite season would you
[Guest 1]: not be able to want to chase winter through the year
[Guest 1]: and if you could you'd be living
[Guest 1]: in the season of your choice, that is
[Guest 1]: F off level, what's F off
[Guest 1]: I am choosing my season, so what's
[Guest 1]: a F off number, so I was told
[Guest 1]: it's about 25 million USD
[Amit Varma]: which is about 200 crores
[Amit Varma]: so 10 million is FU
[Guest 1]: and 25 is, because after that
[Guest 1]: what will you do with more money
[Guest 1]: and I have calculated this
[Guest 1]: because we have discussions
[Guest 1]: with our other friends of ours who have done
[Unknown]: really well, some are still
[Unknown]: in the ranks, my discussions are not of 10-15 million
[Guest 1]: they are not, I mean he doesn't do it
[Unknown]: because he keeps saying how good you are
[Guest 2]: that's all he keeps saying
[Guest 2]: the thought of discussing money is enough for me
[Guest 1]: no, it's fine
[Guest 1]: I don't think, I also find
[Guest 1]: that many people are just trying somewhere
[Guest 1]: to peg their own success to yours
[Guest 1]: so many times it's not about
[Guest 1]: I know so many people who meet me
[Guest 1]: because I know that they are somewhere saying
[Guest 1]: wo, very weird
[Guest 1]: to say but aaj ki roshan hai
[Guest 1]: jab main chaar TV show de
[Guest 1]: radio show do event karta tha
[Guest 1]: aaj many of them do that today right
[Guest 1]: 2-3 podcasts whatever
[Guest 1]: and somewhere they are trying to peg that success
[Guest 1]: now if they want to peg it monetarily
[Guest 1]: fine, some of them do try to peg it monetarily
[Guest 1]: sir main tab charge karoon hu iss show ka
[Guest 1]: kya lagta hai aapko, right
[Guest 1]: and I know what they want to do, you know
[Guest 1]: main kya karta hai, would I have done it, have I done it
[Guest 1]: do I do this much or whatever, and I am very
[Guest 1]: honest and happy to share
[Guest 1]: sometimes I am told by Shaheen and others saying
[Guest 1]: my mother says, itna mat discuss kara karo
[Guest 1]: paise aur logon ko whatever
[Guest 1]: I say kya chhen lega yaar, sab tax paid hai
[Guest 1]: kabhi koi ghalat kaam kiya nahi hai, toh mujhe
[Guest 1]: koi dar toh hai nahi, nahi nahi, jalan hoti hai
[Guest 1]: buri nazar lagti hai, sab hota hai
[Guest 1]: mujhe yaqeen nahi hota hai, sab cheezon mein
[Guest 1]: I just feel that, you know
[Guest 1]: and while I am given a lot of
[Guest 1]: sometimes I am given a lot of gyaan about being
[Guest 1]: spiritual and religious and whatever
[Guest 1]: where I have one, very old
[Guest 1]: my father put up one poster in Lucknow
[Guest 1]: in our house which said, I think
[Guest 1]: kafe azmi sahab ka sher tha, ghar se manzil hai bohot
[Guest 1]: ghar se masjid hai bohot door, chalo aisa
[Guest 1]: kar lein, kisi rote hui bachche ko hasaya jaye
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful, and even I understood it
[Guest 1]: No, no, it's very simple
[Guest 1]: nahi dekho, achchi shayari mujhe kabhi koi
[Guest 1]: lagta hai, ko samajh mein aise aajati hai
[Guest 1]: itni khubsurat baat hai, humanitarianism
[Guest 1]: I think is genuinely the best religion
[Guest 1]: main pachaas cheezein karta rehta hu
[Guest 1]: I don't want to, which I would not
[Guest 1]: consider charity, they are
[Guest 1]: can you help someone in their education, if a kid has
[Guest 1]: got a thing saying, I am doing a photography course
[Guest 1]: I am short of some money and they put up a post somewhere
[Guest 1]: do an anonymous donation
[Guest 1]: to it or whatever, they will never know
[Guest 1]: of it, but it's fine, when that person
[Guest 1]: posts that first picture, you will know you were a part
[Guest 1]: of it, that's good
[Guest 1]: enough, and if you can do that
[Guest 1]: it's very fulfilling, main toh bohot karta rehta hu
[Guest 1]: aisa cheezein, bada maza aata hai, bade khushi lagti
[Amit Varma]: It's very interesting, there's a friend of
[Amit Varma]: mine I have known for
[Amit Varma]: I think 15 or 16 years
[Amit Varma]: I don't think you guys would have come
[Amit Varma]: across him, but I was chatting with him recently
[Amit Varma]: and we were all just sharing stories
[Amit Varma]: about ourselves and at
[Amit Varma]: one point he spoke
[Amit Varma]: about a side of him I never knew
[Amit Varma]: where he said that I like to give away
[Amit Varma]: somewhere or the other 10%
[Amit Varma]: of my money every year, and he started
[Amit Varma]: speaking about all the little things he does
[Amit Varma]: and I never knew that side of him because he had never
[Amit Varma]: revealed it, and he is doing all of it anonymously
[Amit Varma]: toh kisi ko batana nahi hai
[Amit Varma]: kisi ko, matlab signal nahi karna hai logon ko
[Amit Varma]: to see how virtuous I am
[Amit Varma]: just quietly, baith ke, MBA hai
[Amit Varma]: banker hai, sab kuch hai, kone
[Amit Varma]: mein baith ke, kar raha hai, kisi ko
[Amit Varma]: bataya bhi nahi, you know it took me 15-16
[Amit Varma]: years in the course of a very specific conversation
[Amit Varma]: to kind of get it out
[Amit Varma]: and I was very touched by that, I thought that was a
[Amit Varma]: lesson because so many of us want to be
[Guest 2]: good so we can show we are good
[Unknown]: I have a theory on that
[Guest 2]: haan bolo sir
[Guest 2]: mera theory aisa hai ki which is something that
[Guest 2]: me and Sunandan did
[Guest 2]: we've been doing for the last 15 years
[Guest 2]: what I realized was
[Guest 2]: one great thing about
[Guest 2]: USA was they made charity cool
[Guest 2]: okay, and I
[Guest 2]: think that is important in India
[Guest 2]: and the way to make charity cool is to
[Guest 2]: flaunt
[Guest 2]: doing charity, and
[Guest 2]: earlier I used to think ki batana nahi, batana nahi
[Guest 2]: I used to also not say ki apna-apna karo
[Guest 2]: then I realized yaar, log Instagram
[Guest 2]: me photo dali rahe hain, faaltoo-faaltoo
[Guest 2]: photo daal rahe hain, daalne do ki
[Guest 2]: lakh rupee kisi ki education me diya
[Guest 2]: wo ek momentum propel
[Guest 2]: karega, aur phir agar jaise
[Guest 2]: Warren Buffet dera hai, phir Bill Gates bhi dega
[Guest 2]: phir ye bhi dega, kyunki unki
[Guest 2]: pratishtha uske karan, achchi
[Guest 2]: cheez ke liye apni pratishtha badhane me
[Guest 2]: koi problem nahi, that's true, and me and
[Guest 2]: Sunandan actually said that you know tomorrow
[Guest 2]: we did so many fundraisers
[Guest 2]: for Baba Amte's foundation we raised
[Guest 2]: 4 crore rupees, and thankfully you know
[Guest 2]: MS Dhoni supported it, Sachin has supported
[Guest 2]: so many things, so many
[Guest 2]: projects that we are doing, and you will
[Guest 2]: not believe Amit, we used to tell the
[Guest 2]: sponsor, tumhara sabka photo
[Guest 2]: hum nikal ke denge, tum paisa daaloge
[Guest 2]: to, because for us
[Guest 2]: we were the, kya usko bolte
[Guest 2]: pipe of change, humare paas
[Guest 2]: khud ke paas nahi, hum thoda sa 5%
[Guest 2]: contribute karenge, but Sunandan said
[Guest 2]: that our duty is to connect
[Guest 2]: Robin Hood, jiske paas
[Guest 2]: paisa hai, usko with
[Guest 2]: achcha cause, uske liye agar
[Guest 2]: hum log ko apni jaan deke, photograph
[Guest 2]: nikal ke uske
[Guest 2]: bachche ka mundan me bhi kisi ko lana
[Guest 2]: pade to, hume koi isme
[Guest 2]: nahi hona chahiye, because the outcome
[Guest 2]: of that is that 10,000
[Guest 2]: people are having food, and
[Guest 2]: I realized this when I
[Guest 2]: saw one guy said, and then
[Guest 2]: suddenly the other guy would say, kya
[Guest 2]: tumne kiya tha, ye bhi
[Guest 2]: ek charitable
[Guest 2]: hai, so suddenly that guy paid money
[Guest 2]: for our orphanage foundation
[Guest 2]: so I think it's time that
[Guest 2]: we celebrate people who are
[Guest 2]: giving money, or doing something
[Guest 2]: good, because if it
[Guest 2]: creates a chain reaction, I know
[Guest 2]: it may not be your personal thing to do,
[Guest 2]: that's absolutely fine,
[Guest 2]: it's your personal choice, but if you can
[Guest 2]: create a movement that's like
[Guest 2]: what it has happened in America
[Guest 2]: and even 1%
[Guest 2]: of our billionaires start
[Guest 2]: putting money back into society,
[Guest 2]: I think we have enough money to take care of our
[Amit Varma]: country. I think to be honest, people like
[Amit Varma]: Azim Premji and the Nellikini Foundation
[Guest 2]: and all of these people do put a lot of
[Guest 2]: work. And they have started this coolness
[Guest 2]: see today in any Azim Premji
[Guest 2]: conversation, what is the first thing
[Guest 2]: you tell each other?
[Guest 2]: Not that he built a great company,
[Guest 2]: not that he built one of the
[Guest 2]: most successful businesses in the country,
[Guest 2]: sab diya boss, uska dekho
[Guest 2]: na ahuda khud, usne great
[Guest 2]: kaam kiya hai, but uske karan
[Guest 2]: phir uske baad Nadars aaye,
[Guest 2]: Godrejis kar rahe hain, even for that
[Guest 2]: matter, new age companies are doing it
[Guest 2]: because, like you know the other day
[Guest 2]: one of the guys who is an
[Guest 2]: agency for Baijus, I told him
[Guest 2]: that you know, one of the biggest problems of
[Guest 2]: education companies is that the teacher
[Guest 2]: is becoming richer than the student.
[Guest 2]: You should be doing the maximum
[Guest 2]: giving it back to society because
[Guest 2]: you are making money through education. Only
[Guest 2]: then you will put in a word ki theek hai hum
[Guest 2]: billionaire hain, magar hum we are plowing it back
[Guest 2]: into the system. So new age companies,
[Guest 2]: startup companies I interact with,
[Guest 2]: I always tell these guys, whatever,
[Guest 2]: ki boss, jab tumko itna
[Guest 2]: paisa mil raha hai, daalo boss,
[Guest 2]: daalo, system mein daalo, because
[Guest 2]: usse jo milega, wo tumhare
[Amit Varma]: nizam se nahi milega.
[Guest 2]: But wo young age mein itna nahi samajhta hai, probably.
[Amit Varma]: And also then they'll
[Unknown]: negotiate with you, ki you know,
[Guest 2]: victory!
[Guest 2]: Victory!
[Guest 2]: But that I have told all my sponsors.
[Guest 2]: Tu paisa charity mein daalega, main tere liye
[Guest 2]: show karega. Free?
[Guest 2]: No problem at all. That's why many people call me,
[Guest 2]: yaar yeh kar do na. Charity hai,
[Guest 2]: obviously there has to be a genuineness in the charity.
[Amit Varma]: Woh charity ke naam pe bhi aaj,
[Amit Varma]: bahot ullu banate hain.
[Unknown]: Amit Verma podcast fund,
[Guest 2]: aapko deh dunga bank account ka, aap karwalo.
[Guest 2]: Sir, apne liye best hai na,
[Guest 2]: charitable event hai, toh hum karenge,
[Guest 2]: toh direct humko, but aaj kal
[Guest 2]: main ek naya karne lagao. Kyuki paisa kahan
[Guest 2]: jaata hai, wo samajhta nahi. Toh mai boltao ki,
[Guest 2]: mera jo price hai na,
[Guest 2]: let me hand over the cheque to the person.
[Guest 2]: Toh fir
[Guest 2]: usko bhi guarantee ho jaati hai.
[Guest 2]: And even in all the charitable work that
[Guest 2]: we've done, I don't like to call it
[Guest 2]: charitable work, it's more empowering work.
[Guest 2]: We call the kids,
[Guest 2]: we tell the donor,
[Guest 2]: and say, you exchange.
[Guest 2]: Because what happens is, when you put up
[Guest 2]: an organisation, people start
[Guest 2]: suspecting your integrity. That is something
[Guest 2]: I get really hurt about.
[Guest 2]: Ki yaar yeh saatein nahi kiya hoga, isme se
[Guest 2]: 10 rupee khala, nahi yaar mereko wo karna hi nahi hai.
[Guest 2]: Yeh milo, isko 10 jute chahiye,
[Guest 2]: tumare paas 40,000 hai,
[Guest 2]: sportsman ko kya chahiye? Sportsman ka
[Guest 2]: kharcha empowering ke liye simple hai,
[Guest 2]: usko jute chahiye, aur usko
[Guest 2]: international jab he wants to travel
[Guest 2]: for a sporting event,
[Guest 2]: you need to pay for his fees.
[Guest 2]: Today the success of Japan against Germany is
[Guest 2]: because all Japanese players are playing Bundesliga.
[Guest 2]: And today,
[Guest 2]: unless we empower players to play
[Guest 2]: global leagues, which costs a lot of money,
[Guest 2]: you will never create a champion.
[Guest 2]: So now my next project is to make sure that
[Guest 2]: the sporting ecosystem me,
[Guest 2]: I'm tying up with GoSports
[Guest 2]: and a few other organisations, where we are
[Guest 2]: trying to raise money to
[Guest 2]: look after international expenditure
[Guest 2]: of sports people. Half the
[Guest 2]: job done. So yeh
[Guest 1]: karne maza aata hai.
[Guest 1]: Personal charity and
[Guest 1]: building charity
[Guest 1]: as a line of
[Guest 1]: work. That's a separate thing.
[Guest 1]: And you've done it very smartly.
[Guest 1]: With Bawra's we did it.
[Guest 1]: Tell me about Bawra's.
[Guest 2]: Oh Bawra's was a great idea
[Guest 2]: which unfortunately did not continue.
[Guest 2]: But the work continued
[Guest 2]: in our individual levels. And that
[Guest 2]: happened during a drunken evening with
[Guest 2]: Shantanu Moitra,
[Guest 2]: I think Sonan Kirkire was there.
[Guest 2]: And in one of the earlier meetings
[Guest 2]: Shreya Ghoshal was there, Kaushiki Chakravarti
[Guest 2]: was there. And obviously
[Guest 1]: Roshan you were also there.
[Guest 1]: We all were sitting.
[Guest 1]: Nilesh was there.
[Guest 2]: Sameer was there. And the whole
[Guest 2]: idea came from actually Shantanu.
[Guest 2]: Where he said yaar, we have
[Guest 2]: been reasonably successful
[Guest 2]: artists. And it's time
[Guest 2]: to empower
[Guest 2]: the next generation.
[Guest 2]: So, and that
[Guest 2]: is something me and Sunandan were already
[Guest 2]: doing in our little way. So I said
[Guest 2]: hey, great idea. So how do we
[Guest 2]: do it? So we will do concerts and
[Guest 2]: the money that will come out of the concerts, we
[Guest 2]: will empower the
[Guest 2]: next person who
[Guest 2]: is doing something interesting in
[Guest 2]: unconventional professions. And that
[Guest 2]: came from Sonan Kirkire's song
[Guest 2]: Bawra Man Dekhne Chala Ek Sapna
[Guest 2]: Ki Jitne Bawrein Hai Is Duniya Mein
[Guest 2]: Agar Unko Hum Empower Karoge Toh
[Guest 2]: Great Kaam Honge. And that's where
[Guest 2]: we did Bawras.
[Guest 2]: And suddenly I got a
[Guest 2]: call from Shantanu one day
[Guest 2]: that Krishna Patil, after
[Guest 2]: climbing Mount Everest, did not have
[Guest 2]: money. She was the youngest to climb
[Guest 2]: Mount Everest at that time. And
[Guest 2]: she did not have money
[Guest 2]: to climb the next mountain
[Guest 2]: which is Mount Makalu, which is a tougher mountain.
[Guest 2]: Everest relatively in the 8000 meters
[Guest 2]: is an easier
[Amit Varma]: mountain though it's the highest. Everest toh
[Amit Varma]: kutte bhi climb kar lete hai.
[Amit Varma]: For the listeners, that's a meme that
[Amit Varma]: we have that whenever
[Amit Varma]: somebody talks about doing something, we say
[Amit Varma]: yeh toh kutte bhi kar lete hai. And once
[Amit Varma]: I was called out on it, I think when I was at
[Amit Varma]: my friend Gaurav Chintamani's studio
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi, where it was something to the effect of I said
[Amit Varma]: Martini toh kutte bhi pee lete hai. And
[Amit Varma]: somebody said nahi, I call your bluff.
[Amit Varma]: Dikhao mujhe. Toh maine google
[Amit Varma]: kiya aur photo dikhaya, video dikhaya
[Amit Varma]: ki kutta martini pee raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: So the basic funda is ki kutte actually
[Amit Varma]: kuch bhi kar lete hai, literally.
[Guest 2]: But I'm sorry, it's a bizarre
[Guest 2]: meme, but kindly continue.
[Guest 2]: In today's time when everybody is
[Unknown]: suffering from a lot of anxiety issues,
[Unknown]: the reason, the most
[Guest 2]: biggest, best profession is kutta.
[Guest 2]: Because getting the most love.
[Amit Varma]: Best profession is kutta.
[Amit Varma]: What do you want to do for a living? I want to be petted.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, so haan, aap keh rahe the.
[Guest 2]: Toh main kaha tha? Bawaraj.
[Guest 2]: Toh Bawaraj shuru hua, Krishna Patil,
[Guest 2]: actually bahut emotional story thi,
[Guest 2]: ki Shantanu aur
[Guest 2]: hum log baithe the, toh Krishna ko poocha ki
[Guest 2]: kaise lagta hai to be on Mount Everest.
[Guest 2]: He said I climb Mount Everest
[Guest 2]: and when I looked down, I said how am I
[Guest 2]: going to repay this loan? Because
[Guest 2]: she had been given loan by I think
[Guest 2]: Saraswat Bank to the extent of 30 lakh
[Guest 2]: rupees, very expensive to climb Everest.
[Guest 2]: So that kind of
[Guest 2]: you know, I said that you know, after climbing
[Guest 2]: Everest, if you are worried about how to
[Guest 2]: repay the loan, then we got to do
[Guest 2]: something. And that
[Guest 2]: got me thinking as to what we should be
[Guest 2]: doing and we said chalo let's start
[Guest 2]: with a Bawaraj concert. And we did
[Guest 2]: that concert at Rang Sharda.
[Guest 2]: I got Aditya Birla
[Guest 2]: to fund that concert and all the
[Guest 2]: money, thankfully we had
[Guest 2]: Roshan supporting on the console.
[Guest 1]: He did the show. I was directing.
[Guest 2]: I was just generally console directing.
[Guest 1]: And our Encompass crew
[Guest 1]: because I went company came to help out.
[Guest 2]: Came to help out. Then we got
[Guest 1]: as I said Aditya Birla group. Mandira
[Guest 1]: came. Mandira came. Hosted a little bit.
[Guest 1]: Dia Mirza came.
[Guest 2]: Shan came.
[Guest 2]: And all these guys supported. We raised money
[Guest 2]: and based on that, we collected
[Guest 2]: this corpus and she went to Mount Makalu.
[Guest 2]: So that got us very excited.
[Guest 2]: But you know, fundraising
[Guest 2]: is not an easy thing. I spent
[Guest 2]: nearly a month and a half
[Guest 2]: getting those funds. So
[Guest 2]: then what happened is, this was another
[Guest 2]: very interesting thing we did.
[Guest 2]: We tied up with Gosports and I remember
[Guest 2]: that was the time when Gopichand was
[Guest 2]: not getting money
[Guest 2]: to even run the academy.
[Guest 2]: Probably the Andhra government
[Guest 2]: had given him all the infrastructure but
[Guest 2]: running costs and all is not easy
[Guest 2]: to build so many champions.
[Guest 2]: So Gosports said that can you do an
[Guest 2]: event. So we did one event in
[Guest 2]: this
[Guest 2]: smash where Ankur Tiwari
[Guest 2]: and Arpita and Jasleen Royal
[Guest 2]: I got them to perform.
[Guest 2]: Swanand also performed. We raised money
[Guest 2]: and can you imagine at that point
[Guest 2]: of time it was some 8-10
[Guest 2]: lakhs or something like that we raised.
[Guest 2]: And Gopi from
[Guest 1]: Hyderabad had come down
[Guest 2]: for this event and we presented
[Guest 2]: the cheque to Gosports who had an
[Guest 2]: association with Gopichand and now today
[Guest 2]: Gopichand probably would be
[Guest 2]: charging thrice that amount for his personal
[Guest 2]: experience. So I am very proud
[Guest 2]: to say that in the initial years
[Guest 2]: of the badminton movement we played
[Guest 2]: a very small role in kind of doing
[Guest 2]: that. We then raised money for
[Guest 2]: I think 3 or 4 very smart
[Guest 2]: IIT guys by doing a concert
[Guest 2]: in IIT Bombay.
[Guest 2]: So this continued for a while
[Guest 2]: but then we realized
[Guest 2]: we were getting too busy and the
[Guest 2]: one big funder that
[Guest 2]: we needed that if we get
[Guest 2]: 2 crores then we can
[Guest 2]: line up concerts but the money
[Guest 2]: problem will be solved. Because I can take
[Guest 2]: artist time to do concerts
[Guest 2]: but then to sell it and all was
[Guest 2]: taking too much of my time and that's why it
[Guest 1]: kind of took a back seat. Also the 3
[Guest 1]: Bawaras were Bawaras right?
[Guest 1]: These Bawaras are doing their own work
[Guest 2]: and they are artists
[Guest 1]: who are busy also. And you know
[Guest 1]: we were discussing
[Guest 1]: all these ideas about how do we enable
[Guest 1]: so with me it was how do we enable creators
[Guest 1]: with him it was how do we enable
[Guest 1]: anybody who has a cause
[Guest 1]: or a purpose which is worthwhile therefore it was sports
[Guest 1]: and again see it comes from what is your
[Guest 1]: subset of interest right? So
[Guest 1]: with them it seemed to have become sports for a
[Guest 1]: period of time. And honestly even today
[Guest 1]: while Bawaras might be more in spirit
[Guest 1]: but I often see them doing
[Guest 1]: even when they have these couple of...
[Guest 1]: whatever and things
[Guest 1]: in that I see that Bawara's spirit
[Guest 1]: you know when it's you and there's Shreya
[Guest 1]: and there's that Aditya gentleman
[Guest 1]: Mr. Ghosh and all of these people
[Guest 1]: I see that he's still got that network
[Guest 1]: maybe he'll work it. Again see for
[Guest 1]: Saty the issue was I can do this
[Guest 1]: he can do that now beyond this
[Guest 1]: what should I do?
[Guest 1]: That is it. I think somewhere
[Guest 2]: that becomes a bit of a thing
[Guest 2]: hurdle. Then I have to go into the entrepreneur experience
[Guest 2]: which I don't want to do
[Guest 2]: and that stops me from taking any
[Guest 2]: idea to the next level because
[Guest 2]: the moment you become an entrepreneur
[Guest 2]: then all your time
[Guest 2]: goes and that is why Roshan Abbas
[Guest 2]: is special because he can manage both
[Guest 2]: these. Because he's good at delegation
[Guest 2]: I don't enjoy it. And
[Guest 2]: because he has those
[Unknown]: FU, Tefum, FU goals and all
[Unknown]: I don't have those goals. I just need a basic security
[Guest 2]: and the other person
[Amit Varma]: sends a good ticket and goes around the world
[Amit Varma]: I feel you are just like me except much
[Guest 1]: richer. I'll tell you
[Unknown]: one more thing Aditya. You know what happens?
[Unknown]: I don't wear a watch. I told him this
[Guest 1]: long back. What happens?
[Guest 1]: It's a thing I had to, I was
[Guest 1]: taught over a period of time because I remember
[Guest 1]: once or twice speaking to
[Guest 1]: people I would say who were similar in terms of
[Guest 1]: they were entrepreneurs and they were performers
[Guest 1]: and I would say that what is the
[Guest 1]: difference that you do? He said listen
[Guest 1]: when I enter a business meeting
[Guest 1]: I leave my showman, I leave my
[Guest 1]: performer coat outside
[Guest 1]: I keep the performance but I
[Guest 1]: put the rest of that baggage of being a performer
[Guest 1]: outside because if you actually start evaluating
[Guest 1]: for Satay it would be easier
[Guest 1]: to go 4 days, do a show and give that
[Guest 1]: money because that would be equivalent
[Unknown]: to that amount. No but you know Roshan you need to like that
[Unknown]: Exactly. See in your case
[Guest 2]: creation and putting that that's why you
[Guest 2]: say execution, execution, execution. Correct.
[Guest 2]: You like to do that process. I get
[Guest 1]: bored by that. I also tell him like
[Guest 1]: for example I said you know and this was another thing
[Guest 1]: one of our common friends once said we were having a
[Guest 1]: chat and he said he says me and my
[Guest 1]: ex-partner in my business Sukrit
[Guest 1]: he used to say that when we are in the hall
[Guest 1]: our eyes sparkle
[Guest 1]: because we see the light and count
[Guest 1]: if four were here it could have been this
[Guest 1]: if it was in the chair it could have been that
[Guest 1]: you are playing because we are experiential
[Guest 1]: people, we like to play
[Guest 1]: with every sense and therefore
[Guest 1]: the more you put us outside we enjoy
[Guest 1]: that more. Our
[Guest 1]: bias for action is because we
[Guest 1]: have to do that. You know I'll tell you one thing, Bawra's
[Guest 1]: happened and the only role I had to play in Bawra's was
[Guest 1]: that which day do we have to do it
[Guest 1]: and he said this date is free and we
[Guest 1]: booked the date remember and I said
[Unknown]: this date is now booked at Rang Shah. Now you have to do it
[Guest 1]: and then you did it. Otherwise he wouldn't have done it
[Guest 1]: I mean he would have done it but maybe
[Guest 1]: after 2-3 months but it was that you know you have to put the gun
[Guest 1]: to his head just for that reason and again
[Guest 2]: it's that but again it's a very clear bias
[Guest 2]: I know for a fact that one day when I meet somebody
[Unknown]: who says that hey this idea is
[Guest 2]: amazing, I am going to put 2 crores
[Guest 2]: let's do 4 concerts, everybody will come together
[Guest 2]: but that core fund
[Guest 2]: and honestly I have
[Guest 2]: also not taken effort because it takes a lot of
[Amit Varma]: effort. I think you know
[Amit Varma]: Varun Grover in his episode with
[Amit Varma]: me had given this great quote about
[Amit Varma]: which he heard from somewhere
[Amit Varma]: I love the writing but I don't like the paperwork
[Amit Varma]: so I think you know you and I
[Amit Varma]: are kind of in that same boat
[Amit Varma]: our man Roshan here has done the writing
[Guest 2]: done the paperwork. That's why he has more paperwork
[Unknown]: that's why he has
[Unknown]: more paperwork also
[Amit Varma]: yeah cream paper
[Unknown]: wow wow
[Amit Varma]: so
[Amit Varma]: Roshan you know
[Amit Varma]: besides your extreme productivity
[Amit Varma]: the other thing which I am very
[Amit Varma]: impressed by and something
[Amit Varma]: we can all learn from is how
[Amit Varma]: it's a hunger for new experiences
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: you know how
[Amit Varma]: you know Monsoon Wedding came
[Amit Varma]: about, Meera Nair
[Amit Varma]: directed musical which is going to Broadway now
[Amit Varma]: you know how that came about, what was
[Amit Varma]: your reaction, what was the
[Guest 2]: experience like, what were your learnings
[Guest 1]: just hungry
[Guest 1]: absolutely true
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: that need
[Guest 1]: that creative curiosity
[Guest 1]: this festival which you are
[Guest 1]: already a part of as I mentioned to you
[Guest 1]: Stumble
[Guest 1]: we are doing this next year in fact but the idea
[Guest 1]: was it's a festival of creative curiosity
[Guest 1]: and everybody said you know what 2-3 people
[Guest 1]: who worked with me said
[Guest 1]: whatever you have to do at home, you expand it
[Guest 1]: and make it a festival
[Guest 1]: but this need
[Guest 1]: to satisfy curiosity
[Guest 1]: to a large degree and
[Guest 1]: creatively because you know
[Guest 1]: when you make a little bit of money you get
[Guest 1]: approached by so many of these funds and everybody
[Guest 1]: who comes and says sir
[Guest 1]: I will make it 100
[Guest 1]: I say sir you can't give me a return
[Guest 1]: which my brain gives
[Guest 1]: my brain makes 0 into 100
[Guest 1]: so you can never get that multiplier
[Guest 1]: right, where does that multiplier come from
[Guest 1]: that multiplier comes only when
[Guest 1]: you go out and
[Guest 1]: find new things to do
[Guest 1]: now I am a child when it comes
[Guest 1]: to learning and I have childlike enthusiasm
[Guest 1]: about these things so
[Guest 1]: this year it had started
[Guest 1]: with me after Dubai when we
[Guest 1]: did one or two concerts and actually I spent
[Guest 1]: a lot of time with Veer and Veer
[Guest 1]: has a lot to do so the day we were doing the
[Guest 1]: Veer Das event the first day
[Guest 1]: unfortunately his excellency
[Guest 1]: the head of Abu Dhabi passed away
[Guest 1]: and they in the day it happened
[Guest 1]: and by the evening they said no shows will happen
[Guest 1]: and we had already said we won't do an event
[Guest 1]: so Veer came home and we were talking
[Guest 1]: and then in conversation he was telling about the television show
[Guest 1]: he is making and about his New York special
[Guest 1]: and I mean the most amazing story about Chris Rock
[Guest 1]: where he went to the Comedy Central
[Guest 1]: performance place in New York and he said you know
[Guest 1]: I was there and I was going to perform
[Guest 1]: and they had about 5 performers with
[Guest 1]: 5-10 minute slots
[Guest 1]: and they said you got a surprise act
[Guest 1]: for the rest of the evening
[Guest 1]: and suddenly they came and said guys we are knocking
[Guest 1]: off all the acts before
[Guest 1]: because Chris Rock is performing and he is going to come
[Guest 1]: and Chris Rock is legend in life
[Guest 1]: he said ultimately
[Guest 1]: I went and I was like you know
[Guest 1]: they said will you just
[Guest 1]: introduce Chris Rock so he went and he did
[Guest 1]: the 5 minute set before Chris Rock
[Guest 1]: and then when it finished they said will you also close
[Guest 1]: so he went and did it
[Guest 1]: so he said you know
[Guest 1]: I closed for Chris Rock
[Guest 1]: so his wife was sitting there and he said no
[Guest 1]: he opened for you
[Guest 1]: and I love
[Guest 1]: Veer's the same thing about Veer
[Guest 1]: his bias for action and his ability to keep doing new things
[Guest 1]: so while talking like this he said
[Guest 1]: Edinburgh Fringe is happening, let's go
[Guest 1]: and I have always wanted to go to the Fringe
[Guest 1]: and every year I have had this thing because August used to be work time
[Guest 1]: and kids used to come back from vacation
[Guest 1]: so I said I am going to go for a fact
[Guest 1]: and I went for 10 days
[Guest 1]: when I was there I saw
[Guest 1]: so much experimental theatre
[Guest 1]: I saw 21 shows in 7 days
[Guest 1]: I had a backpack
[Guest 1]: I used to get up at breakfast and go
[Guest 1]: you can't pre book
[Guest 1]: and I stood in lines for 2-2 hours
[Guest 1]: humbling experience, you are meeting
[Guest 1]: waiters who are trying stand up comedy
[Guest 1]: from New York who have flown down to do their experimental set
[Guest 1]: a girl who is 19
[Guest 1]: who has written her first play and been called
[Guest 1]: somebody who has been their thespian for 30 years
[Guest 1]: standing on the road and distributing his tickets
[Guest 1]: it is for any creator
[Guest 1]: you have to go to a Fringe
[Guest 1]: just to experience this madness
[Guest 1]: of a city coming alive with the arts
[Guest 1]: I think somewhere there in my head
[Guest 1]: this wanting to get back to theatre
[Guest 1]: became a big urge
[Guest 1]: but not any play because I have been
[Guest 1]: offered a lot of plays to do here in Bombay
[Guest 1]: but I was like whatever I had to do here
[Guest 1]: I did it because honestly after doing Aladin
[Guest 1]: and a lot of other things
[Guest 1]: I was like what will I do after this
[Guest 1]: I did Prithvi, I did single play
[Guest 1]: I did Aladin, I wrote
[Guest 1]: and suddenly this call happened
[Guest 1]: from Dilip Shankar and he said Roshan
[Guest 1]: they are looking for somebody to do this
[Guest 1]: and I called Amol who sort of manages
[Guest 1]: my work at Commune and many other artists
[Guest 1]: and he was like sir
[Guest 1]: three months
[Guest 1]: and that is when the first big thing was
[Guest 1]: three months, two months
[Guest 1]: in Bombay and this was premiering
[Guest 1]: at the World Cup at Doha because it was
[Guest 1]: part of the Qatar Creates thing
[Guest 1]: and then we were told that next year
[Guest 1]: which is in April, May
[Guest 1]: it will go off Broadway which is the process
[Guest 1]: you go off Broadway then producers come
[Guest 1]: then if they selected then it goes on Broadway
[Guest 1]: then there will be an India tour and a global tour
[Guest 1]: and the way Meera has lived with this story
[Guest 1]: ever since the film was made and the play
[Guest 1]: has happened twice before but in smaller
[Guest 1]: avatars, so Berklee they did a show
[Guest 1]: where Javed Jafri played Lalit
[Guest 1]: and Javed is a very good dancer
[Guest 1]: but you know sings
[Guest 1]: and is also
[Guest 1]: so he was there
[Guest 1]: and Namit was there from that show only
[Guest 1]: and Sharwari was there and many other actors
[Guest 1]: I think at that point in time Ali Sethi
[Guest 1]: was being considered for something
[Guest 1]: as a role and beautiful
[Guest 1]: so they did shows there
[Guest 1]: for 6 weeks, it was a housefull
[Guest 1]: show that I had heard of
[Guest 1]: the script was still evolving then in 2019
[Guest 1]: they did Delhi, they did 12 shows
[Guest 1]: again completely new and with
[Guest 1]: theatre, unless you are in
[Guest 1]: a resident theatre space the play
[Guest 1]: changes to adapt to the place
[Guest 1]: and Qatar was going to be a revolving
[Guest 1]: stage, LED screens
[Guest 1]: it was Meera's biggest vision
[Guest 1]: and therefore the fact of being part
[Guest 1]: of that vision, being part of a film
[Guest 1]: that I had loved to watch
[Guest 1]: and experiencing the
[Guest 1]: triple threat, as I said acting
[Guest 1]: singing, I could do that, I had to do dance as well
[Guest 1]: and it was clearly told
[Guest 1]: and I was also told by
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: Meera's partner, he came
[Guest 1]: and he said that Roshan, we are treating
[Guest 1]: this as an ensemble cast which means that
[Guest 1]: while you might be playing a very significant
[Guest 1]: role, there will be other scenes where you might
[Guest 1]: be playing a PM and walking on with a
[Guest 1]: suitcase and whatever, are you comfortable with that
[Guest 1]: I said I don't have anything like that
[Guest 1]: so I said I don't mind, let me
[Guest 1]: see if I fit in, so I did
[Guest 1]: the audition, I was by myself
[Guest 1]: in Dubai, there was no one there, I called my friend
[Guest 1]: who used to act with me in theatre 25 years ago
[Guest 1]: in Lucknow, who came, we did
[Guest 1]: a printout of the script, he sat opposite
[Guest 1]: and read the lines, I did
[Guest 1]: a decent audition, then with the songs
[Guest 1]: I had to sing, I took 2-3 extra days
[Guest 1]: learned the songs, my daughter
[Guest 1]: reviewed them online and passed them
[Guest 1]: saying ya it's decent, and I did
[Guest 1]: that, and that's
[Guest 1]: when I, there was a song
[Guest 1]: which is towards the end
[Guest 1]: I'll just tell you, so it has
[Guest 1]: the original line
[Unknown]: Riya you must come home
[Unknown]: again
[Unknown]: Riya
[Unknown]: my child, my
[Unknown]: life, my own
[Unknown]: please come home
[Guest 1]: again
[Guest 1]: so when I heard it for the first time
[Guest 1]: the scale for me
[Guest 1]: this is not my scale
[Guest 1]: so this
[Guest 1]: is based on Des
[Unknown]: this world
[Unknown]: may be touched
[Unknown]: this world may be touched
[Unknown]: may there be love
[Unknown]: may I
[Unknown]: live or not
[Guest 1]: Sajda
[Guest 1]: continue
[Guest 1]: so when the first time I heard this
[Guest 1]: I was shocked
[Guest 1]: still I think I'm singing
[Guest 1]: half note lower than the other thing
[Guest 1]: and Vishal Bhardwaj's music
[Guest 1]: a lot of other songs
[Guest 1]: the opening song, all the other
[Guest 1]: songs that I had, ensemble songs
[Guest 1]: were beautiful
[Guest 1]: so when I committed to it, I realized
[Guest 1]: that I'm doing this with love of theatre, it was
[Guest 1]: paying, but theatre pays you, theatre money
[Guest 1]: and there is a beautiful line that I read
[Guest 1]: in a broadway article, because after this I researched
[Guest 1]: broadway first
[Guest 1]: how much does it cost, how much does it cost, what does it cost
[Guest 1]: so it was very clear that in broadway
[Guest 1]: you can't make a living, you can make a killing
[Guest 1]: so see a Lion King
[Guest 1]: makes 1.8 billion dollars
[Guest 1]: yeah, a top notch
[Guest 1]: actor once he gets billing
[Guest 1]: Tony and whatever etc, can be earning
[Guest 1]: a great sum of money
[Guest 1]: or whatever, but
[Guest 1]: in India, you know sometimes people who work
[Guest 1]: at Prithvi get a thousand rupees a show
[Guest 1]: so there is no comparison
[Guest 1]: so I first told Amol Singh
[Guest 1]: I'm comfortable with this, as long as I can get
[Guest 1]: four days off to do my regular
[Guest 1]: event work, because I still
[Guest 1]: thankfully as a live event host get paid well
[Guest 1]: and I made sure that I get enough of these shows
[Guest 1]: so this money thing
[Guest 1]: you know I don't like living off interest, I like to live
[Guest 1]: off my current earning, so that
[Guest 1]: was something which we took care of, they were very accommodating
[Guest 1]: they gave me the dates
[Guest 1]: we started doing rehearsals
[Guest 1]: at Rang Mandir
[Guest 1]: in Bandra, for a month we
[Guest 1]: rehearsed there, and suddenly we had everyone
[Guest 1]: from Emily Whitaker
[Guest 1]: our music director, Carrie Ann
[Guest 1]: who is actually the movement director
[Guest 1]: and the choreographer for Six
[Guest 1]: which is a Tony nominated play
[Guest 1]: and has won a couple of Tonys as well
[Guest 1]: plus there was Shampa
[Guest 1]: Gopi Krishna who was the other director, who was the other
[Guest 1]: choreographer, brilliant
[Guest 1]: brilliant set of musicians who were working with us
[Guest 1]: on a daily basis, and the cast
[Guest 1]: I mean frankly, I have never worked
[Guest 1]: with a more eclectic
[Guest 1]: set of people, more talented
[Guest 1]: and more giving
[Guest 1]: because you know, I have done plays
[Guest 1]: before where there will be 2-3
[Guest 1]: bad ones, and then
[Guest 1]: you know that he has an ego, he will fight
[Guest 1]: he will argue, he will have a temper tantrum
[Guest 1]: he will be late, etc
[Guest 1]: but here
[Guest 1]: everyone, I mean small things
[Guest 1]: keep happening, but nothing to that
[Amit Varma]: degree, there is a saying in poker
[Amit Varma]: if you don't know who is the fish
[Unknown]: at the table, it's you
[Unknown]: so I think, if you don't know who is the bad one
[Unknown]: this Roshan,
[Unknown]: you are missing one
[Guest 1]: but you must hear this
[Amit Varma]: these are the two beautiful stories that happened
[Guest 1]: so after about 10-15
[Guest 1]: days, and Namit was playing PK Dubey
[Guest 1]: which was a beautiful role by Vijay Raaz
[Guest 1]: I am playing Naseer Saab's role or whatever
[Guest 1]: Charu Shankar was playing my wife, brilliant actress
[Guest 1]: from Delhi, person I knew before
[Guest 1]: as well also, because you know we worked on
[Guest 1]: one or two other projects, small small projects earlier
[Guest 1]: but Lilayat Ji's role
[Guest 1]: is there, Sharwari was playing
[Guest 1]: Shifali Shah's role, I mean
[Guest 1]: and honestly everybody, Kulbhushan Khaminda's role
[Guest 1]: Sagar Deshmukh, fabulous cast
[Guest 1]: sorry, Edwin Joseph
[Guest 1]: playing the love interest and Mansi Multani
[Guest 1]: playing the daughter Aditi
[Guest 1]: again, like I can't, I can go on
[Guest 1]: and on about each of these people, each of these people
[Guest 1]: Piya Behroopiya world tour, so and so
[Guest 1]: Yeh, Broadway, Beauty
[Guest 1]: and the Beast lead, these are all people
[Guest 1]: among them Roshan Ambar
[Guest 1]: so A,
[Guest 1]: this whole thing of saying, let's learn
[Guest 1]: was a great thing
[Guest 1]: My one habit
[Guest 1]: a lot of people, I like it
[Guest 1]: sometimes some people don't like it
[Guest 1]: I, I, I make everyone
[Guest 1]: like a family, so I am very empathetic
[Guest 1]: or whatever, so if anyone needs anything
[Guest 1]: I will tell them, it comes from here, it happens
[Guest 1]: so, before Dua
[Guest 1]: one day, Naveed was sitting with us at lunch, he says
[Unknown]: Roshan Bhai,
[Unknown]: you tell me, your
[Unknown]: deep, dark, hidden
[Unknown]: which bad habit do you have?
[Unknown]: I mean, there must be something
[Unknown]: he says, look
[Guest 1]: there can't be such a good person
[Guest 1]: Arjun Bhai, what should I say
[Guest 1]: I am really like this
[Guest 1]: No, no, Roshan Bhai, I don't believe it
[Guest 1]: that whole day they all went after me
[Guest 1]: what is your habit or whatever
[Guest 1]: you will have to ask Shaheen Waheen
[Unknown]: Shaheen Waheen
[Unknown]: who is this Waheen?
[Guest 1]: this Waheen is
[Guest 2]: my parents, my loved ones
[Guest 1]: don't say too much, this Waheen's Waheen
[Guest 1]: this happened
[Guest 1]: after this we did
[Guest 1]: rehearsals here, I managed to get my parents
[Guest 1]: here to come for the dress rehearsal
[Guest 1]: which happened at Andrews, Vishalji attended
[Guest 1]: that show, Nasreen Muni Kabir
[Guest 1]: came for it, many other, everybody
[Guest 1]: was allowed to invite 2-3 people, so my parents flew
[Guest 1]: Shaheen had an exhibition in Dubai
[Guest 1]: so she said she will come to Doha, my parents flew
[Guest 1]: in from Lucknow, so for me the fact
[Guest 1]: that my parents, my dad in 82
[Guest 1]: took a flight with my mom and came
[Guest 1]: was itself the biggest achievement
[Guest 1]: and the performance
[Guest 1]: really went off well
[Guest 1]: because by this time it had become muscle memory
[Guest 1]: and in theatre, it needs to become
[Guest 1]: muscle memory for you to then
[Guest 1]: start playing
[Guest 1]: you know, you have to go from point A to point B
[Guest 1]: how you have to go
[Guest 1]: and it's the only medium
[Guest 1]: so in fact one day when Meera was directing
[Guest 1]: when one actor came and said that
[Guest 1]: there is so much direction right now and whatever
[Guest 1]: we will see in the play, so he was joking
[Guest 1]: the girl turned and said
[Guest 1]: ultimately theatre is the only
[Guest 1]: medium where the actor has control
[Guest 1]: because nobody stops you right
[Guest 1]: they can't stop the scene and say retake it again
[Guest 1]: no, it's you, and I said
[Guest 1]: I never thought of this
[Guest 1]: so I know I have to go from here to there
[Guest 1]: but how do I do it, what
[Guest 1]: craft can I use in it
[Guest 1]: how aware am I of my body, how am I
[Guest 1]: standing, where am I looking
[Guest 1]: and you know I swear to you, I have never
[Guest 1]: enjoyed the craft as much as this
[Guest 1]: because I
[Guest 1]: did so many things with it
[Guest 1]: like there is a scene
[Guest 1]: in which I am running after Rhea when she is leaving
[Guest 1]: the house and it's a very
[Guest 1]: it's just a very pillared kind of
[Guest 1]: metallic structure, there was a light below
[Guest 1]: now what I started doing
[Guest 1]: I started going and stopping at the light
[Guest 1]: and after that
[Guest 1]: this light used to be on, so there is a man
[Guest 1]: standing in the dark, a light is on on Sunday
[Guest 1]: and in that I turn, so you can see
[Guest 1]: my half lit face, now see I have imagined
[Guest 1]: this and I have told someone, see this is happening
[Guest 1]: another person, now this is where
[Guest 1]: you are playing with the thing, I have to
[Guest 1]: go and tell Rhea
[Guest 1]: please come, Rhea Rhea please
[Guest 1]: and then I turn slowly as the music moves
[Guest 1]: that is where you enjoy the craft
[Guest 1]: and stuff and frankly when we did the performance
[Guest 1]: Vishal ji came and said
[Guest 1]: Roshan, we have done this show three times
[Guest 1]: you are Lalit
[Guest 1]: for me this was a big
[Guest 1]: thing, Meera came
[Guest 1]: to me and at that time she turned and said
[Guest 1]: you are the essence of Lalit for me
[Guest 1]: and obviously a director says
[Guest 1]: things to all their actors to motivate
[Guest 1]: them, her direction
[Guest 1]: was unique, the first day she sat
[Guest 1]: and did a session with me, she said you know
[Guest 1]: Lalit and Pimmi's love is like an old
[Guest 1]: shoe
[Guest 1]: it's very comfortable
[Guest 1]: but it's also very disregarded
[Guest 1]: it was such a big thing
[Guest 1]: she didn't tell me to behave like this with her
[Guest 1]: this was enough direction
[Guest 1]: enough direction for that relationship
[Amit Varma]: to develop, it's a classic show don't tell
[Guest 1]: and she does it
[Guest 1]: with everyone
[Guest 1]: like why does the thing of
[Guest 1]: Dubey having the marigold flower
[Guest 1]: she says it's their love
[Guest 1]: is so good and
[Guest 1]: so cheap in everyone's eyes
[Guest 1]: marigold flower is not expensive
[Guest 1]: like what all things
[Guest 1]: and that music's understanding
[Guest 1]: visual's understanding
[Guest 1]: that was on a different level, so sometimes
[Guest 1]: my directorial mind starts coming and I say no no
[Guest 1]: act, don't direct in your mind
[Guest 1]: that I do this and that
[Guest 1]: which comes in
[Guest 1]: but in the off times I would sit with Emily
[Guest 1]: and say how does musical theatre work in the US
[Guest 1]: what are these roles
[Guest 1]: whatever and now as I said I want to do musical
[Guest 1]: theatre workshops next year and let's see what happens
[Guest 1]: with all that, should we do a play, I don't know but all that will happen
[Guest 1]: but when we reached Doha
[Guest 1]: it was a brand new
[Guest 1]: challenge because new auditorium, brand
[Guest 1]: new placement, brand new plotting
[Guest 1]: technicals all of this started
[Guest 1]: and the challenge of world cup is happening
[Guest 1]: have you got your HIA visa or not
[Guest 1]: blah blah all of this, in the middle of which
[Guest 1]: Spoken Fest is going on here
[Guest 1]: so my lunch breaks used to be how much sponsorship
[Guest 1]: who should I call, I call him
[Guest 1]: blah blah but I would only use that one otherwise I would
[Guest 1]: be totally immersed in the play, again
[Guest 1]: Sourav, Varun, the entire team here
[Guest 1]: Vaishnavi, Nino, Aditya
[Guest 1]: everybody, Tess, without Tess
[Guest 1]: and Shantanu the curation would not have happened
[Guest 1]: for Spoken and so what they build
[Guest 1]: is absolutely unique, so they
[Guest 1]: created that but they gave me the space to
[Guest 1]: do this, when we started
[Guest 1]: doing the show in Doha, again
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: the day the show happened
[Guest 1]: Meera walked on stage at the premiere
[Guest 1]: and danced on stage with us and I
[Guest 1]: know her, she is very very fun
[Guest 1]: and then I got that one hug on stage
[Guest 1]: and she just
[Guest 1]: you know in my ear she turned and said
[Guest 1]: you were impeccable and
[Guest 1]: to me that was
[Guest 1]: because
[Guest 1]: either she will fire me or I will fire her because there was a lot of pressure
[Guest 1]: I have to dance, I have to do this
[Guest 1]: I am not a dancer, she knows
[Guest 1]: I can do two steps with her but I am not
[Guest 1]: you know, but I played it as a
[Guest 1]: father of a bride who is an average
[Guest 1]: dancer, that's fine, you can play
[Guest 1]: like this, so that happened
[Guest 1]: immense amount of learning
[Guest 1]: very very satisfying and very humbling
[Guest 1]: right, so I think that whole thing
[Guest 1]: of learning new things comes
[Guest 1]: in this manner, it has been
[Guest 1]: incredible and we are now all waiting to see
[Guest 1]: whether, show is definitely happening
[Guest 1]: in April, now it's a matter of how many days
[Guest 1]: are required, the
[Guest 1]: Queen Anne theatre people where it is going to be done
[Guest 1]: had come, they loved the show
[Guest 1]: we had lots of discussions with them
[Guest 1]: and these are discussions where we are talking about
[Guest 1]: the tapestry of the show, what do you feel
[Guest 1]: you know, what would you have
[Guest 1]: done in this, could have done this
[Guest 1]: and she has played with the play so much
[Guest 1]: now over these years that she has got
[Guest 1]: spoiled for choice about scenes and other things that we could
[Guest 1]: do, absolutely, I mean I could
[Guest 1]: not have asked for a better learning
[Guest 1]: creative experience at the age
[Guest 1]: of 52, you know, so I am
[Guest 1]: really happy about it and hoping next year that
[Guest 1]: we get what's called a call back, the actor
[Guest 1]: call back will happen for all of us
[Guest 1]: but it's a union driven thing, so we also
[Guest 1]: need to wait for how many
[Guest 1]: actors get, because you know you have a limited
[Guest 1]: number of national actors you can take and all this but
[Guest 1]: we are all sitting and praying and saying
[Guest 2]: Honge Kamiya
[Guest 1]: Kaunsa union hai, CM se baat pe?
[Guest 1]: It's not like the people come knocking
[Guest 1]: at Film City, Kaunsa aapke
[Guest 1]: paas hai, card hai ke nahin
[Amit Varma]: What I found impressive about
[Amit Varma]: your stories of this play is
[Amit Varma]: how you were able to go through
[Amit Varma]: an unlearning and learning process
[Amit Varma]: especially with regard to singing, tell me
[Guest 1]: a little bit about that
[Guest 1]: See the first thing is that
[Guest 1]: western choral singing
[Guest 1]: and Indian classical singing
[Guest 1]: which is a very
[Guest 1]: unique combination in this play
[Guest 1]: one teaches you to
[Guest 1]: sing on an out breath, one tells you to sing on an in breath
[Guest 1]: right
[Guest 1]: aap jab gaate na, aap jab
[Guest 1]: raag waqara kar rahe hain
[Guest 1]: you know and Namit actually
[Guest 1]: told me this, ek sir dikhi yeh yaha par cheez hai
[Guest 1]: toh yeh sunke seekhna padta hai
[Guest 1]: then what happens is that
[Guest 1]: western singing is a lot
[Guest 1]: and Emily
[Guest 1]: you know her fiance
[Guest 1]: had come down and whatever for the play
[Guest 1]: and he was watching it from a third and he said
[Guest 1]: you know I'll tell you one thing, I've seen a lot of Broadway
[Guest 1]: it has so much technique
[Guest 1]: you all have so much heart
[Guest 1]: and yeh sachahi hai because
[Guest 1]: yaha par I do believe ke
[Guest 1]: opera singer wo yeh jo hote hain wo head voice
[Guest 1]: aur yeh voice wo sabse gaare hote hain
[Guest 1]: hum log dil kolke gaare hote hain
[Guest 1]: par wo dil se gaane me jo ek
[Guest 1]: feeling hai, wo kahin aur nahi thi
[Guest 1]: and when this whole thing was happening
[Guest 1]: about learning the singing
[Guest 1]: we had Maryanne who was this lovely teacher
[Guest 1]: in Bombay who was telling us how to sing
[Guest 1]: and she was taking extra
[Guest 1]: classes with a few of us who had weaker voices
[Guest 1]: which included me and another couple of
[Guest 1]: actors and we were allowed to
[Guest 1]: ask for more classes and I took more classes
[Guest 1]: and learnt that to a certain degree
[Guest 1]: then when you start working
[Guest 1]: and you're harmonizing
[Guest 1]: ab ek gaana hai jisme aapka
[Guest 1]: mann kar raha hai ke you know
[Guest 1]: no matter where you journey
[Guest 1]: our love will journey too
[Guest 1]: there's a song called Anand
[Guest 1]: toh wo chal raha hai and I'm certainly told nahi nahi
[Guest 1]: aap isko gaayenge apne
[Guest 1]: no matter where you journey
[Guest 1]: because the song's
[Guest 1]: tapestry requires that, you are going
[Guest 1]: to play bass, somebody else is soprano
[Guest 1]: someone else is alto and when you
[Guest 1]: see that come together, we had a day
[Guest 1]: which was called a
[Guest 1]: it was called a Sitzprobe
[Guest 1]: we said this sounds rather
[Guest 1]: weird, a Sitzprobe is what are we doing
[Guest 1]: kaha probe karoge?
[Guest 1]: ek Sitzprobe hota hai, the day when
[Guest 1]: the musicians and the singers come together
[Guest 1]: as a group for the first time
[Guest 1]: otherwise they perform individually
[Guest 1]: which is what we were doing, rehearsing with the piano and stuff
[Guest 1]: and we would do vocal exercises in the morning
[Guest 1]: and stuff
[Guest 1]: vocal exercises in the morning etc
[Guest 1]: used to happen but the day the Sitzprobe
[Guest 1]: happened is the day I actually put up my post on
[Guest 1]: Instagram where I said you know three months of doing this
[Guest 1]: and
[Guest 1]: having a 29 year old
[Guest 1]: Fernanda Douglas who's a brilliant teacher
[Guest 1]: absolutely brilliant
[Guest 1]: sitting with me and telling me when I was singing
[Guest 1]: again the song
[Guest 1]: Meeraj used to say pura word bolo
[Guest 1]: because my song starts
[Guest 1]: Angan starts with me singing a line which says
[Guest 1]: Rest
[Unknown]: in the warmth of
[Guest 1]: this Angan
[Guest 1]: Hindi bhi hai, ab
[Guest 1]: aare ho aap line keh ke aare ho
[Guest 1]: walk kar rahe ho, saas bhi kheech di hai
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: but wo in time
[Guest 1]: hai lagta hai, whatever and stuff
[Guest 1]: but she told me, listen, the word is rest
[Guest 1]: so let it
[Guest 1]: rest
[Unknown]: in the warmth
[Guest 1]: of this Angan
[Guest 1]: and she would just make me
[Guest 1]: visualize it
[Unknown]: and four walls and the sun
[Unknown]: and the sky
[Guest 1]: ab wo sky ka expanse jo hai
[Guest 1]: wo word mein aana chahenge, yeh saam
[Guest 1]: main nahi sochta
[Guest 1]: sun
[Guest 1]: and main power se
[Guest 2]: zyada gaata tha
[Guest 1]: so in a sense, playback ki khubiyan isme laayi hai
[Guest 1]: matlab jo hum log ko sonu
[Unknown]: sab log show se pehle batata hai na
[Unknown]: mati pukaare tujhe
[Unknown]: des pukaare
[Unknown]: wo jo hai na
[Unknown]: abhi mujhme
[Unknown]: gayi ho
[Unknown]: baaki thodi
[Unknown]: si hai
[Guest 2]: zindagi
[Guest 1]: that's sonu
[Guest 1]: he brings zindagi
[Guest 1]: I was doing a bunch of shows with us for Toyota
[Guest 1]: and backstage khada hua hai
[Guest 1]: roshan bhai phir aisa ho raha tha
[Unknown]: stage pe music bil rahi hai
[Guest 1]: and he's talking to you right
[Guest 1]: toh roshan bhai aisa ho raha tha
[Unknown]: maa ki badi kripa hai
[Unknown]: chahe jo tumhe
[Guest 1]: and I was like yeh kya hua
[Guest 1]: and he's standing backstage
[Guest 1]: walking to stage but his control
[Guest 1]: bohot hi alag hai
[Unknown]: aur wo uska jo
[Guest 2]: word ke andar ghusna
[Guest 2]: and that he's learned from
[Guest 1]: Mohammad Rafi and Roshan
[Guest 1]: they were just too good
[Guest 1]: aur abhi bhi matlab main hohi kaunga ki main jab
[Guest 1]: Namet aur Sharwari who I think are amongst the
[Guest 1]: Mansi, Edwin
[Guest 1]: brilliant singers
[Guest 1]: inke saamne mujhe abhi bhi lagta hai ki main kaccha hu
[Guest 1]: par ha
[Amit Varma]: jaha tha usse kahin aage hai
[Amit Varma]: example of something which you sang
[Guest 1]: one way then and now you sing it
[Guest 1]: so I'll give you a very simple thing
[Guest 1]: so see this line which is
[Guest 1]: you know
[Guest 1]: the last line in that Rhea song
[Unknown]: which is you know this
[Unknown]: Rhea my child
[Guest 1]: my life
[Guest 1]: so line is Rhea my child
[Guest 1]: my life my own
[Guest 1]: originally shurum mein usko bhi gata tha
[Unknown]: Rhea my life
[Unknown]: my child
[Guest 1]: my own
[Guest 1]: own ka do teen
[Unknown]: my own
[Guest 1]: aisa tha
[Guest 1]: into rehearsal yeh hua ki bhai
[Guest 1]: Rhea my child my life
[Guest 1]: ab wo ho gaya hai Rhea
[Guest 1]: ek to Rhea ko bula rahe hai
[Unknown]: right so this whole thing became about
[Unknown]: Rhea
[Guest 1]: my life my
[Guest 1]: child, now child ko child
[Guest 1]: hona chahiye and my own
[Guest 1]: actually Sharwari one day said you know in one rehearsal
[Unknown]: Vishal ji ne isko gaya tha
[Unknown]: my own
[Unknown]: and I just heard it
[Guest 1]: and I said oh my god yeh kitna khabsurat hai
[Guest 1]: and I swear to you main wo gata tha
[Guest 1]: aur audience roti thi
[Guest 1]: because aap moment mein
[Guest 1]: saath mein aapko pata hai ki aadmi
[Guest 1]: apne bacche se baat kar raha hai
[Guest 1]: yeh chila chila aur
[Guest 1]: isko pata hai normally I'm a
[Guest 1]: power singer which means when I can't hit a note
[Guest 1]: I project so
[Guest 1]: high but I was not allowed
[Guest 1]: to hold back and do it
[Guest 1]: and there's only one line in this which is
[Unknown]: where I'm actually saying come home
[Unknown]: with me, come home
[Guest 1]: aur yeh
[Guest 1]: originally main utaar to come home
[Guest 1]: with me, come home yeh ho raha tha
[Unknown]: nahi bhaiya
[Guest 1]: bulao aur bula ke matlab
[Guest 1]: ro rahe ho ke yaar wo aa nahi rahi hai
[Guest 1]: and right after that there's a beautiful speech
[Guest 1]: and again
[Guest 1]: Meera used to point it out because I'd finished the song and I'd come into
[Guest 1]: the speech and no, what happened
[Guest 1]: she says stay in that moment
[Guest 1]: and I was like but there's a beat
[Guest 1]: she says Roshan, the musicians will
[Guest 1]: stay
[Guest 1]: aap ginti mat giniye
[Guest 1]: ki do ke baad, accha hum log aata hai ki
[Guest 1]: niti pe aana hai, chaar pe aana hai, na
[Guest 1]: theatre hai feel karna hai
[Guest 1]: aur wo jo thi, the ability to feel
[Guest 1]: and I mean Shaheen watched the first show
[Guest 1]: then she watched one more show then she came for the
[Guest 1]: third show and the one
[Guest 1]: day she was supposed to come and we had a double show and she
[Guest 1]: couldn't because she slept and she was so upset
[Guest 1]: like how could I not see
[Guest 1]: I mean if Shaheen saw three shows
[Guest 1]: and my wife is very loving and very
[Guest 1]: whatever but she's also very critical of my work
[Guest 1]: and each day when she came back
[Guest 1]: she was like I could see that she had cried her
[Guest 1]: eyes out in every show
[Guest 1]: and you know when she turned she says you know if
[Guest 1]: I so wish all our friends were here
[Guest 1]: when will it happen in India and whenever
[Guest 1]: it happens here Inshallah I'll be able to show everyone
[Guest 1]: the same thing so hopefully November in India
[Guest 1]: next year if Meera takes me back
[Unknown]: I don't know but
[Amit Varma]: I'm saying please note
[Amit Varma]: Shaheen saw the three shows, Waheen ne kitne
[Amit Varma]: dekhte hai
[Guest 1]: sara sochiye
[Guest 1]: dekhe ma'am ko chahiye pata hai, toh waha par bohot saari
[Guest 1]: waheene thi, jo ki katri ladies
[Guest 1]: thi, oh my god, toh kya hua
[Guest 1]: ek din aisa hi hua ki hum log show se dekhte hai, actor ki
[Guest 1]: badi choti choti khushiya hoti hai, dekhe
[Guest 1]: ek hoti tali bachti hai, standing ovation milta hai
[Guest 1]: jab aap apni curtain bow lete hai
[Guest 1]: toh kya audience ki applause badti hai, choti cheeze
[Guest 1]: hai, small little vanity
[Guest 1]: bahti thi
[Guest 1]: aapke pehle kaun tha
[Guest 1]: by the way we've also given the last curtain bow
[Guest 1]: which is a very big thing
[Guest 1]: concealer, so we were like
[Guest 1]: whatever, aap makeup utaar ke
[Guest 1]: aap bahar jaa rahe hain, hum log jaha se nikalte the
[Guest 1]: waha se ek rasta tha which you could just
[Guest 1]: go anonymously but as an actor
[Guest 1]: you don't want to do that, you want to almost
[Guest 1]: bump into the audience
[Guest 1]: right and be very honest
[Guest 1]: and you do it for that moment, waha par pohache hua hai
[Guest 1]: aur audience, these ladies were there
[Guest 1]: so suddenly the manager said
[Unknown]: Mr. Roshan, yes
[Guest 1]: Mr. Roshan, can you do some pictures
[Guest 1]: hum log ke aadat hai ki aap apna haath lege
[Unknown]: aur you rakhe hai, and now there were three ladies
[Guest 1]: you know what they did, I stood in front
[Guest 1]: of them like this and they took pictures
[Guest 1]: of me as if I was a specimen in a museum
[Guest 1]: very happy, thank you so much
[Guest 1]: habibi, thank you, and it was just
[Guest 1]: solo pictures of me standing like this
[Guest 1]: you know specimen number 233 and whatever
[Guest 1]: but I just did lots of smiles and
[Guest 1]: whatever and left, then there were all
[Guest 1]: our, Roshan bhai
[Guest 1]: main Delhi se aapko dekh raha tha
[Guest 1]: radio pe, my god
[Guest 1]: wale bhi audience thi
[Guest 1]: par wo jo khushi thi, wo bahut zyada thi
[Unknown]: toh waha par wahi ne, bahut hi aisi
[Unknown]: par is kisum ki thi
[Unknown]: amazing
[Unknown]: namuna
[Amit Varma]: kala ka tasmeer hai
[Amit Varma]: so Vikram, tell me about your journey through music
[Amit Varma]: because what I have noticed is that you sing damn well
[Amit Varma]: I know that you would sing as a kid
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, you have
[Amit Varma]: you know, you did all of these things with the
[Amit Varma]: Bawras, so you weren't singing obviously
[Amit Varma]: but, or were you singing also?
[Guest 2]: no, I was not singing with them
[Unknown]: because they were very good singers
[Unknown]: you must do your
[Guest 1]: Bhimsen Joshi
[Guest 2]: kindly do Bhimsen Joshi
[Guest 2]: as I said, my mum
[Guest 2]: was a huge influence because of
[Guest 2]: the classical music scenario
[Guest 2]: and unfortunately what happened was
[Guest 2]: when she was doing her riyaz
[Guest 2]: I would sing those songs
[Guest 2]: and I would go into a wrong raag
[Guest 2]: and at one point of time she started
[Guest 2]: cursing me because she also started singing
[Guest 2]: wrongly
[Guest 2]: can you give us an example?
[Guest 2]: I basically
[Guest 2]: can't give you an example because this was some
[Guest 2]: it was not this, I think it was a
[Guest 2]: Malkaus or something
[Guest 2]: like that, which I had completely messed it up
[Guest 2]: for her, but Bhimsen Joshi was
[Guest 2]: somebody who we saw every
[Guest 2]: year 6 am in the morning and
[Guest 2]: you know, he had this unique
[Guest 2]: ability as in
[Guest 2]: and he was damn funny right
[Guest 2]: when he was in his total groove
[Guest 2]: once I believe he
[Guest 2]: pulled the mat
[Guest 2]: under the tabla wala and stuff like that
[Guest 2]: tabla wala was playing and he was getting dragged
[Guest 2]: while he was playing his tabla
[Unknown]: but he had this unique style you know
[Unknown]: singing
[Guest 2]: that was the great
[Guest 1]: Bhimsen Joshi
[Amit Varma]: you need a video portion of this
[Guest 2]: we need a video portion of this
[Guest 2]: so then it kind of became more
[Guest 2]: of imitating singers
[Guest 2]: but yeah when Roshan and me we all together
[Guest 2]: we sing all, everybody from SD Burman to
[Guest 2]: Shankar Mahadevan
[Guest 2]: because I am a huge Shankar Mahadevan
[Guest 2]: fan, the kind of work that
[Guest 1]: he has done, but we can
[Guest 1]: but his biggest, I must tell you because he doesn't want
[Guest 1]: to give away his entire stage act
[Guest 1]: but the bit that he does about
[Guest 1]: so he does this whole
[Guest 1]: various singers and their levels of constipation
[Guest 2]: and why they sing
[Guest 2]: so this was an act
[Guest 1]: I used to do
[Guest 2]: I am sorry
[Unknown]: don't even do
[Guest 2]: this act anymore
[Guest 2]: so my theory was that
[Guest 2]: every Bollywood singer suffers from constipation
[Guest 2]: and the first stage is
[Guest 2]: Kumar Sanu
[Unknown]: so
[Unknown]: singing
[Guest 2]: singing
[Guest 2]: so lucky Ali said
[Guest 2]: if this guy can constipate I can do it at level 2
[Unknown]: singing
[Guest 2]: singing
[Guest 2]: Mika, 3rd stage
[Unknown]: singing
[Guest 2]: singing
[Guest 2]: Narayan. The song from Lagaan started very well. But see what happened to it.
[Unknown]: Ghanan ghanan ghir ghir aaye badra, ghan ghan ghor kare chhaye badra, damag damag gujhe badra ke dang ke,
[Unknown]: damag damag dekho vijriye chamke, man dhadkaaye badarwa.
[Guest 2]: Vaat laga di constipation ki. So this was an act which was hugely popular and I would go on, right, you know,
[Guest 2]: the little bit of constipation of, you know, erotic constipation of Sonu Nigam, where he would, like the same song that you sang, Roshan.
[Unknown]: Al ko khile ke saaye. So extended constipation, Sonu Nigam.
[Unknown]: Aas koi jo aaye, laakh samhalo paagal dil ko,
[Unknown]: dil dhadke hi jaye, is haath ko, tum thamlo.
[Unknown]: O meharwa, kal ho na ho.
[Guest 2]: I would not even touch Himesh Rashmiya because it would be an incurable disease.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, that continued and then one song that kind of united was Swanan's song.
[Guest 2]: Let's sing it together.
[Unknown]: Bawra man dekhne chala ek sapna.
[Unknown]: Bawre se man ki dekho, bawri hai baatein. Bawri si dhadkane hain, bawri hai saanse. Bawri se karvato se,
[Unknown]: nindiya kyon bhaage. Bawre se nain chahe, bawre jaronkon se, bawre nazaron ko tak na.
[Unknown]: Bawra man dekhne chala ek sapna.
[Guest 1]: Beautiful, arre waah, amazing.
[Guest 1]: Dekhi maine inke soprano ke saath base hi lagaya.
[Unknown]: Main wahi dekhna tha ki...
[Guest 2]: Mewaani kiya, mewaani kiya.
[Guest 2]: Constipation gangane ke baad, base pe pakadna hi tha.
[Guest 2]: Roshan bhai, aap bhi ek gaano.
[Guest 2]: Main toh abhi toh...
[Guest 2]: Roshan sings a song which is very dear to my heart, Shankar Ehsaan Loi and you know, it was my way of expressing my frustration when I had typhoid and I had my temperatures to go from 100 to 104.
[Guest 2]: So, Nilesh, our friend used to say that through his singing, I would know whether the temperature is 101, 102, 103 or whatever.
[Guest 2]: So, when I said mitwa, it meant 101.
[Guest 2]: Mitwa, 102.
[Guest 2]: Mitwa...
[Guest 2]: So, but you must sing two lines of mitwa.
[Unknown]: Scale badal le chale.
[Unknown]: Mere mann yeh bata de tu, kis aur chala hai tu.
[Unknown]: Kya paaya nahi tu ne, kya dhoond raha hai tu.
[Unknown]: Jo hai ankahi, jo hai ansuni, wo baat kya hai bata.
[Unknown]: Mitwa, kahe dhadkane tujh se kya.
[Unknown]: Mitwa, yeh khud se toh na tu chhupa.
[Unknown]: Amazing.
[Guest 2]: But Amit, how can we forget Baljeet?
[Unknown]: We have to do Baljeet.
[Unknown]: First, let's tell the history of Baljeet.
[Guest 1]: Who is Baljeet?
[Guest 2]: Actually, both of us have a bad memory, but we know that we formed a cult.
[Guest 2]: 50 years ago.
[Guest 2]: How was it formed? Why?
[Guest 2]: There were two cults. One was called Conehead and the other was called Baljeet.
[Guest 2]: And one was called Parpeetaram.
[Unknown]: Yes, Parpeetaram, but it was an accounting company.
[Guest 2]: It was a front-faced company.
[Guest 2]: So, at one time, Amit Verma used to not only diet, but he also tried to exercise.
[Amit Varma]: It's true.
[Guest 2]: This was probably 20 years back and one fine day we decided that let's exercise.
[Guest 2]: And let's not let the feeling pass, we'll exercise.
[Guest 2]: So we felt like exercising and both started jogging in the morning.
[Guest 2]: It's been 2-3 days now.
[Guest 2]: The momentum was shifting that why do we have to jog.
[Guest 2]: But then at the jogger's park in Lokhandwala, we met a guy who gave us tea.
[Guest 2]: And somewhere at some point of time when we turned, we realized that he had a conical head.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we started calling him Conehead because his head was a cone.
[Amit Varma]: Like you would see in the Star Trek films, I think, but very pronounced.
[Amit Varma]: So after that, it became like a thing.
[Amit Varma]: There is no mood for jogging.
[Amit Varma]: Who will wake up early in the morning?
[Amit Varma]: But Conehead is there.
[Guest 2]: He is making tea.
[Guest 2]: Who will drink it?
[Guest 2]: And if his tea doesn't sell, we will feel bad.
[Guest 2]: So for just this, whatever.
[Guest 2]: Sometimes I think he was an imaginary character.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I remember Conehead.
[Guest 2]: And because of Conehead, we went for 2 months of jogging.
[Guest 2]: And that guy became like an underlying conscience keeper in our life.
[Guest 2]: Whenever we had a lack of motivation, we used to remember that Conehead is there for us.
[Guest 2]: That's why we have to go.
[Guest 2]: And I am sure before every recording, Amit remembers Conehead.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, I don't, but now I will because you have said it.
[Amit Varma]: But the Baljeet is a more interesting story because that actually there was a Baljeet song and a Baljeet dance.
[Amit Varma]: So he will sing it for us, but I won't dance.
[Amit Varma]: But the lines were that Baljeet is my brother, I am Baljeet's sister, Sanam is unfaithful.
[Amit Varma]: I have no freaking idea how we came up with the lines, but this was me and Vikram.
[Amit Varma]: This was for both of us.
[Amit Varma]: So the day I left MTV, not the day I left, but my last day in MTV.
[Amit Varma]: We decided that okay, let's dance a little on this.
[Amit Varma]: So I remember we got Yasmin Jain who was in head of production.
[Unknown]: Hemant Kinkre.
[Amit Varma]: Hemant Kinkre and Saurabh.
[Amit Varma]: I think one more person.
[Amit Varma]: And they paid tribute to his exit.
[Amit Varma]: So we all, and I still remember the steps.
[Amit Varma]: So we did a dance, he was singing, we did a dance to Baljeet.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, it was a very poignant moving moment because it was my last day there.
[Guest 2]: But we have carried Baljeet with us.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, we have carried Baljeet with us.
[Guest 2]: You know, it so happened that one day Amit, we used to drive from Lokhandwala to MTV office many times.
[Guest 2]: And for some strange reason, one day we started calling each other Baljeet.
[Guest 2]: I used to call him Amit, he used to call me Vikram.
[Guest 2]: What Baljeet, what's happening?
[Guest 2]: So he said, yes Baljeet, everything is fine.
[Guest 2]: So Baljeet became a binding factor between us.
[Guest 2]: And then there was this song in the 90s if you remember.
[Unknown]: You broke my heart, you left me nowhere, my love is unfaithful.
[Guest 1]: So in Sanam.
[Guest 2]: The film Sanam Bewafa.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, Sanam Bewafa, I think it was Salman Khan.
[Guest 2]: So Sanam Bewafa's song entered Baljeet.
[Guest 2]: One evening at 8 o'clock.
[Guest 2]: And then what did he, like you said, what is your word, acting?
[Guest 2]: What?
[Unknown]: Triple threat.
[Unknown]: Triple, yeah.
[Guest 2]: We also had a triple threat.
[Guest 2]: This was a threat actually.
[Guest 2]: Dancing.
[Guest 2]: And then came this legendary song.
[Guest 2]: But we don't know why Baljeet and Baljeet's sister was referenced.
[Amit Varma]: No idea.
[Guest 2]: But the song and the dance sequence was clapping.
[Unknown]: So Baljeet is my brother.
[Unknown]: I am Baljeet's sister, Sanam Bewafa.
[Unknown]: We still don't know why Baljeet existed.
[Guest 2]: Why this song existed.
[Guest 2]: Why this dance existed.
[Guest 2]: But I think the best farewell Amit Verma has ever received in his life.
[Amit Varma]: It's the greatest farewell in the history of MTV.
[Amit Varma]: And if you remember, it went downhill from there.
[Amit Varma]: Rodis, Vodis, everything came after that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, that was like, the Baljeet was a high point.
[Amit Varma]: And if we are talking about Baljeet, then we are also talking about Jack and Jill.
[Guest 1]: So I think actually, just like Sathe had developed his act.
[Guest 1]: So I used to host many years before that.
[Guest 1]: And it started in a Lucknow college festival.
[Guest 1]: Where I had to go on stage.
[Guest 1]: And I used to go to festivals for money.
[Guest 1]: Because I used to know that he was getting 200, he was getting 500.
[Guest 1]: So pocket money used to be 1000.
[Guest 2]: So it used to be supplemented.
[Unknown]: Sir, you used to go for money only.
[Guest 1]: No, girls colleges used to have more opportunities.
[Guest 1]: I am sorry to be very honest.
[Guest 1]: But I used to go to Lucknow.
[Guest 1]: And suddenly this thing happened.
[Guest 1]: You know, I saw a brilliant actor.
[Guest 1]: And I mean, I don't know what happened to him.
[Guest 1]: But there was an actor from Aligarh Muslim University.
[Guest 1]: He came on stage in mono acting.
[Guest 1]: And he did it so well.
[Guest 1]: He was able to do.
[Guest 1]: He used to say that I am coming up and playing Jekyll and Hyde.
[Guest 1]: And he would first do Jekyll and then do Hyde.
[Guest 1]: And then he acts amazing.
[Guest 1]: I don't know how he could do it.
[Guest 1]: But he would keep one half of his face absolutely straight.
[Guest 1]: And only contort the other half.
[Guest 1]: So we looked at him and said, no one can win with this.
[Amit Varma]: You think this guy is Baljeet?
[Guest 1]: You know what, but I swear.
[Guest 1]: And his banner.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: And I have never seen a better mono actor.
[Guest 1]: So I looked at him and said there is no chance of winning.
[Guest 1]: So let's go and entertain.
[Guest 1]: So I went on stage and I think this was the first time that.
[Guest 1]: So Jekyll and Hyde became a story where I would get on stage.
[Guest 1]: And this has lasted me till.
[Guest 1]: Even I think I don't host corporate events in that manner.
[Guest 1]: Now I only go for talks.
[Guest 1]: Till I did.
[Guest 1]: Any moment.
[Guest 1]: Whether it's a fashion show or a corporate event.
[Guest 1]: Or Malaika Arora's clothes are not ready backstage.
[Guest 1]: Or the dancer is not here.
[Guest 1]: Or the lights are not on.
[Guest 1]: Send me to Roshan Mas.
[Guest 1]: I have to handle the boss.
[Guest 1]: I don't know how long.
[Guest 1]: I don't know.
[Guest 1]: I don't know means.
[Guest 1]: Because Jekyll and Hyde is me doing Jekyll and Hyde.
[Guest 1]: In as many singers as possible.
[Guest 1]: If I have heard the singer.
[Guest 1]: People respond to the tune.
[Guest 1]: Because sometimes the tonality obviously I don't end up getting.
[Guest 1]: But they respond to the tune.
[Guest 1]: If I can do it.
[Guest 1]: And the story used to be that you know.
[Guest 1]: Just like the stars are gathered in this hall.
[Guest 1]: So it would be at a conference.
[Guest 1]: Or if it's a show.
[Guest 1]: All these lovely people are gathered in this hall.
[Guest 1]: Just like that once there was an auditorium.
[Guest 1]: Which was filled with a great audience.
[Guest 1]: But there was another auditorium unfortunately next to it.
[Guest 1]: Which was filled with children.
[Guest 1]: And all these musical stars had to go and collect their awards.
[Guest 1]: At this galaxy of stars.
[Guest 1]: But they ended up at the children's auditorium.
[Guest 1]: And when the curtain went up.
[Guest 1]: And they said boss we are entertainers.
[Guest 1]: And we have to entertain.
[Guest 1]: So the children don't know our lyrics.
[Guest 1]: But they must know Jekyll and Hyde.
[Guest 1]: So we will come in our own style and perform Jekyll and Hyde.
[Guest 1]: So I will say 2-3.
[Guest 1]: After that you can request.
[Guest 1]: So various singers.
[Guest 1]: And Vikram you can always give us your requests.
[Guest 1]: As we go along.
[Guest 1]: So the first person who got up to do Jekyll and Hyde was Elvis Presley.
[Guest 1]: And Elvis reached up on stage.
[Guest 1]: And this is what he did.
[Unknown]: He said.
[Unknown]: Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: They both went up the hill.
[Unknown]: And Jackie fell down.
[Unknown]: Until she broke her crown.
[Unknown]: It was Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Went up the hill.
[Unknown]: Shooby doo bop doo.
[Unknown]: Dee da da doo.
[Guest 1]: So Elvis would be the first person.
[Guest 1]: Who would do it.
[Guest 1]: And the next person who came on.
[Guest 1]: Was Stevie Wonder.
[Guest 1]: Stevie Wonder.
[Guest 1]: Had this big grin on his face.
[Guest 1]: At every point.
[Guest 1]: And he came on.
[Unknown]: And this is what he did with Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: While Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Went up the hill.
[Unknown]: And Jackie fell down.
[Unknown]: Until she broke her crown.
[Unknown]: And Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Went up the hill.
[Unknown]: It was Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Shooby doo bop doo.
[Unknown]: Dee da da doo.
[Unknown]: Went up the hill.
[Unknown]: And Jackie fell down.
[Unknown]: Until she broke her crown.
[Unknown]: And Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Went up the hill.
[Unknown]: And this is what he did with Jackie and Hyde.
[Unknown]: While Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Went up the hill.
[Unknown]: And this is what he did with Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: While Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Went up the hill.
[Unknown]: It was Jekyll and Hyde.
[Unknown]: Shooby doo bop doo.
[Unknown]: Dee da da doo.
[Unknown]: bottom of my heart. Amazing.
[Guest 1]: There was a famous performer from Bihar, his original name was Michael Al Jackson.
[Guest 1]: He didn't get a visa to the American embassy, he came back as Michael Jackson.
[Guest 1]: And I used to crack one very bad joke, which I'm about to do in a minute here,
[Guest 1]: which was about his favorite song being an Elton John song,
[Guest 1]: don't let the sun go, whatever. So anyway, so I will not go there.
[Guest 1]: But anyway, so, so, so basically this was Michael Jackson got up and he did his version.
[Guest 1]: He said,
[Unknown]: Well, Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch a pail of water and Jack fell down and he broke his crown.
[Unknown]: And Jill came tumbling after, and Jill came tumbling after, Jill came tumbling after.
[Unknown]: Jack, Jack, come on, everybody is Jack and the whole world wants to tell you right now that the guy fell down.
[Guest 1]: It's Jack. So Michael Jackson happened.
[Guest 1]: So there was Khalid who would have his sister crush and therefore would sing,
[Unknown]: Jack and Jill went up the hill, Jack fell down and he broke his crown.
[Unknown]: Jill came tumbling after Jack, then Jill, then Jill, they both went up the hill.
[Unknown]: And Jill, they both went up the hill.
[Guest 1]: And Shankar Mahadevan, who was going breathless in those days, and he said,
[Unknown]: Jack and Jill went up, they both went up the hill, Jack and Jill went up, they went up
[Unknown]: the hill too, together, together, together, together, Jack fell down and Jill, Jill she
[Unknown]: broke her crown, and finally dollar mehndi, dollar mehndi because they used to earn in
[Unknown]: dollars, they used to sing on the mehndi ceremony, Raina, Raina, Jack, Jack and, Jack, Jack and,
[Guest 1]: Jack, Jack and Jillela, Jack, Jack and, Jack, Jack and, Jack, Jack and Jillela, Jack now
[Guest 1]: you know, He went up there and, Jill she fell down and Jack broke his crown, Jack now.
[Unknown]: Jack, Jack and, Jack, Jack and, Jack, Jack and Jillela, Jack, Jack and, Jack, Jack and,
[Guest 1]: Jack, Jack and Jillela, Jack and Jill went up, they both went up the hill, up the hill,
[Unknown]: Up that hill, up that hill, up that hill, up that hill.
[Unknown]: Jack fell down, Jill broke her crown,
[Unknown]: and they came tumbling after.
[Unknown]: After, after, after, after, after, after, after.
[Unknown]: Tunak, tunak, tunak, tunak, tunak, tunak, tunak, tunak, tunak.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing, amazing, amazing.
[Guest 1]: So Jack and Jill's infinite versions
[Guest 1]: played until the audience got tired, or we got tired.
[Guest 1]: Or you could have said, this gentleman, Malaika Arora.
[Unknown]: These are old stage tactics.
[Unknown]: What all have we done?
[Guest 1]: We made a good Christmas for it.
[Guest 1]: We had a party for New Year's.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is done.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing, everything is done for me.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I've taken enough of your time.
[Amit Varma]: So I think I can finally begin to let you go.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, if for people watching this,
[Amit Varma]: especially young people watching this,
[Amit Varma]: given that we are old fogies, however much you may disagree,
[Amit Varma]: Roshan, if you had to, no, I'm kidding.
[Amit Varma]: But if you had to sort of, from all the things
[Amit Varma]: that you've learned in your life,
[Amit Varma]: give advice to young people today, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what are the, like, if you had to talk
[Amit Varma]: to a young Roshan, who's 20 years old,
[Amit Varma]: what advice would you give him?
[Guest 1]: Honestly, to a young Roshan, though,
[Guest 1]: it would be do exactly what you did.
[Guest 1]: Because frankly, I had a very, very fulfilled life.
[Guest 1]: But if it is to young people at large,
[Guest 1]: as I said that there is a lot of hope we all
[Guest 1]: have in this generation for the simple reason
[Guest 1]: that remain unafraid, keep experimenting, keep doing.
[Guest 1]: You know, in this digital ether, in this digital world,
[Guest 1]: that virtual like, that virtual heart, that virtual share
[Guest 1]: is a small dopamine hit maybe for you
[Guest 1]: and for others around you.
[Guest 1]: But if it doesn't get translated into action,
[Guest 1]: it's a tale full of sound and fury signifying nothing
[Guest 1]: almost by the end of it.
[Guest 1]: If you really want to go, there is no better,
[Guest 1]: there is no generation which will be as empowered as you,
[Guest 1]: no generation that will have as many tools as you,
[Guest 1]: no generation where the ability to break down
[Guest 1]: all those old guardrails, you know,
[Guest 1]: all those guardrails you can break so easily.
[Guest 1]: We had to knock on doors of All India Radio,
[Guest 1]: stand outside film studios, read 20 scripts, do auditions,
[Guest 1]: do all of those things.
[Guest 1]: And I did a very small share of it,
[Guest 1]: but then thankfully the success was incremental.
[Guest 1]: But do that.
[Guest 1]: Also in the initial years, work for experience, not for money.
[Guest 1]: I know this sounds very easy from where I'm sitting today.
[Guest 1]: But I can tell you about 50% of the jobs
[Guest 1]: I did in my first seven or eight years of working,
[Guest 1]: and maybe even more than that, were done for experience,
[Guest 1]: not for money.
[Guest 1]: They gave me all the skills I have to make the money.
[Guest 1]: They gave me all the bad experiences in small doses,
[Guest 1]: not being paid, not signing contracts, being cheated,
[Guest 1]: being stood up at an event, having to suddenly, you know,
[Guest 1]: see be replaced by another person, all of those things.
[Guest 1]: Everything, those small hurts, because till the age of 25,
[Guest 1]: maybe your brain is still learning how to process
[Guest 1]: and how to react and respond to things.
[Guest 1]: Delve into as many experiences as you can.
[Guest 1]: Life is there to make money.
[Guest 1]: Don't fall for this trap of money today, money today.
[Guest 1]: Don't look at only the success charts.
[Guest 1]: I genuinely feel that there needs
[Guest 1]: to be a failure slash stumbling chart as well.
[Guest 1]: And every stumble is a learning.
[Guest 1]: Go for those, because there is so much to do that.
[Guest 1]: Along the way, don't forget the people who build you, ever.
[Guest 1]: Don't forget your family, ever.
[Guest 1]: Because in the end, they will be around you.
[Guest 1]: Whatever you do.
[Guest 1]: I'm going to end with a line that I just
[Guest 1]: heard in Tathastu from Zakir, because I absolutely adore it.
[Guest 1]: He turned and said, professional loss is temporary.
[Guest 1]: Personal loss is permanent.
[Guest 1]: Just make sure that you give enough time to those.
[Guest 1]: And there's another line from his show.
[Guest 1]: I think he's a soothsayer for this generation to a large degree.
[Guest 1]: He says, don't ruin anyone's magic.
[Guest 1]: There's no need.
[Guest 1]: Be gentle.
[Guest 1]: Everybody has had a bad day.
[Guest 1]: Everybody's done that.
[Guest 1]: If you can, if you can find that empathy within you,
[Guest 1]: that's all that everybody needs.
[Guest 1]: Beautiful words.
[Guest 2]: Amazing.
[Guest 2]: Don't ruin it.
[Guest 2]: One thing I've learned is don't give advice to youngsters.
[Guest 2]: Actually, they may not take it.
[Guest 2]: But having said that, I would have taken Roshan's advice to myself
[Guest 2]: if I was young, is that I don't want to change anything, especially
[Guest 2]: my mental state and the fact that I live without any goal and stuff like that.
[Guest 2]: But still, I'm curious enough to, I think curiosity is the fundamental thing.
[Guest 2]: If you're curious, a lot of your anxieties, your stress kind of
[Guest 2]: gets canceled because you are anyway in the moment.
[Guest 2]: You're trying to seek out of life and others.
[Guest 2]: And I would have taken one piece of advice from Roshan to my younger self,
[Guest 2]: that yes, you live the life that you have chosen to in the way you are doing
[Guest 2]: right now, but just get a little more execution friendly
[Guest 2]: and put out more creative in the universe so that,
[Guest 2]: and take it to the logical conclusion and just don't get away from it.
[Guest 2]: Beyond that, nothing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I would just say that I disagree with you in the one sense.
[Amit Varma]: In the context of my own life, that I would do things differently.
[Amit Varma]: I would do a lot differently.
[Amit Varma]: And I think my advice comes from there.
[Amit Varma]: Advice number one is respect the passing of time.
[Amit Varma]: Time passes quicker than you know it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's a saying, the days are long, the years are short.
[Amit Varma]: The years go by before you even realize how fast they are moving.
[Amit Varma]: So respect that time.
[Amit Varma]: Don't waste any of it.
[Amit Varma]: I would also say bet on yourself, right?
[Amit Varma]: If you grow yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Kids today are so fortunate, not just kids, we today are so fortunate
[Amit Varma]: that we live in a world where you can learn anything.
[Amit Varma]: You can go online and you can pick up any skill and become good at it.
[Amit Varma]: So respect time, bet on yourself.
[Amit Varma]: You know, compound yourself, as Sam Altman says.
[Amit Varma]: You know, always try to figure out ways in which you are getting better
[Amit Varma]: at something and ask yourself every day, every week,
[Amit Varma]: what have I learned this week?
[Amit Varma]: How am I better?
[Amit Varma]: Also, look within yourself for happiness, not outside.
[Amit Varma]: I think too many people spend too much time worrying about what other people
[Amit Varma]: think of them, where really nobody's thinking of anybody else.
[Amit Varma]: We've all got our heads up our own asses, right?
[Amit Varma]: So just, you know, look within for happiness.
[Amit Varma]: Validation doesn't really matter.
[Amit Varma]: And the words from James Clear and Atomic Habits
[Amit Varma]: sort of ring really true to me when he says everything you do today
[Amit Varma]: will impact your future self.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's supremely important.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'm very angry at the young me because he didn't compound himself
[Amit Varma]: and he wasted too much time.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that impacted his future self.
[Amit Varma]: And what I think we all have to remember is that everything you do today
[Amit Varma]: builds the person you are tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: Think of that person.
[Amit Varma]: Be compassionate towards him.
[Amit Varma]: And this doesn't mean that you work, work, work all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Leisure is also great.
[Amit Varma]: Being in the moment is great.
[Amit Varma]: Listening to a piece of music and giving into it
[Amit Varma]: and not looking at what your calendar says is also great.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that overall, you've just got to sort of think about that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there are many ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like one good metric is that if you think of your ideal self,
[Amit Varma]: what is the perfect version of you doing that you don't do?
[Amit Varma]: And what is a perfect version of you not doing that you do?
[Amit Varma]: And if you just, you know, do a journal entry.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, writing a journal every day is also great advice that I would give.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say that, you know, make that your first journal entry
[Amit Varma]: and write about, you know, that ideal self.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what are they doing that you are not and what are they not doing
[Amit Varma]: that you are doing?
[Amit Varma]: And I think they would also listen to this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So it's fine.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, what you're saying is find your own Baljeet.
[Amit Varma]: Find your own inner Baljeet and make him your Bhayna.
[Guest 1]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I sometimes, when I start, he says to me,
[Guest 1]: you know, he says that you have your Urdu, English, Kashm-Kashm, whatever.
[Guest 1]: Kashm-Kashm, whatever, whatever, you know, he exploits it a lot.
[Guest 1]: Right, I was just forgetting two lines in between because it's a, it just,
[Guest 1]: it's that whole thing of turning and saying that it takes a lot of effort.
[Guest 1]: And I, you know, how I keep talking about this thing of saying,
[Guest 1]: karo, karo, karo, karo, you know, karna bahut zaruri hai.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, and doing to that extent, doing to that extreme,
[Guest 1]: that pinnacle is, it gets, you know, it gets smaller as you go there.
[Guest 1]: But if you want to reach there, you have to put in that much effort.
[Guest 1]: And what you said, what he said as a joke or whatever, ultimately, I think it's the same.
[Guest 1]: That there's so much to do in life, do it.
[Guest 1]: You know, go and do it.
[Guest 1]: You said, do it each day, compound it, do that over and over.
[Amit Varma]: Bias for action.
[Guest 1]: Bias for action is something that I just want to reiterate that or whatever.
[Guest 2]: I wish I had forgotten it.
[Guest 2]: I was about to spit blood and he said, why is he promoting anemia?
[Unknown]: Wow, wow.
[Guest 1]: I mean, you know, one of those, one of those…
[Guest 2]: However difficult it is, try to find your why.
[Amit Varma]: It's very difficult.
[Guest 2]: Do you need to find a why, Vikram?
[Guest 2]: What is your why?
[Guest 2]: See, why means whether it is goal setting or what in traditional terms.
[Guest 2]: But if you get a little meaning that you have to do this, then I have seen that psychological issues are also solved a lot,
[Guest 2]: which are likely to come in the younger generation.
[Guest 2]: For that matter, even just, I mean, to this thing, even when my mother was unwell,
[Guest 2]: when I, she has lived her life, she has taught me the things.
[Guest 2]: But the moment I triggered that, you know, you should do this and that will this thing,
[Guest 2]: suddenly her healing process got better.
[Guest 2]: I know, I don't mean to say the why is a very philosophical construct about your existence in the universe,
[Guest 2]: but it is that small, that I should do this, that kind of solves a lot of problems before.
[Amit Varma]: What's your why?
[Guest 2]: That's what I'm still trying to find.
[Amit Varma]: It changes.
[Amit Varma]: Let's hope that in 2023, we all find our why's, all three of us and everyone listening in.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you guys for your company today.
[Guest 1]: Thank you.
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Guest 1]: Jai Bilao.
[Amit Varma]: Jai Bilao.